1
Introduction to Assembly
Language

1.1.	BASIC COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE

Address, Data, and Control Buses 
  A computer system comprises of a processor, memory, and I/O devices.  I/O is used for interfacing with the external world, while memory is the  processor’s internal world. Processor is the core in this picture and is  responsible for performing operations. The operation of a computer can be  fairly described with processor and memory only. I/O will be discussed in a  later part of the course. Now the whole working of the computer is performing an operation by the processor on data, which resides in memory.
The scenario that the processor executes operations and the memory contains data elements requires a mechanism for the processor to read that data from the memory. “That data” in the previous sentence much be rigorously explained to the memory which is a dumb device. Just like a postman, who must be told the precise address on the letter, to inform him where the destination is located. Another significant point is that if we only want to read the data and not write it, then there must be a mechanism to inform the memory that we are interested in reading data and not writing it. Key points in the above discussion are:
•
•
precisely which element
•
The group of bits that the processor uses to inform the memory about which element to read or write is collectively known as the address bus. Another important bus called the data bus is used to move the data from the memory to the processor in a read operation and from the processor to the memory in a write operation. The third group consists of miscellaneous independent lines used for control purposes. For example, one line of the bus is used to inform the memory about whether to do the read operation or the write operation. These lines are collectively known as the control bus.
These three buses are the eyes, nose, and ears of the processor. It uses them in a synchronized manner to perform a meaningful operation. Although the programmer specifies the meaningful operation, but to fulfill it the processor needs the collaboration of other units and peripherals. And that collaboration is made available using the three buses. This is the very basic description of a computer and it can be extended on the same lines to I/O but we are leaving it out just for simplicity for the moment.
  The address bus is unidirectional and address always travels from  processor to memory. This is because memory is a dumb device and cannot  predict which element the processor at a particular instant of time needs.  Data moves from both, processor to memory and memory to processor, so the data bus is bidirectional. Control bus is special and relatively complex, because  different	lines	comprising	it	behave	differently.	Some	take
 
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming	Course Code: CS401
	CS401@vu.edu.pk
	
 

information from the processor to a peripheral and some take information from the peripheral to the processor. There can be certain events outside the processor that are of its interest. To bring information about these events the data bus cannot be used as it is owned by the processor and will only be used when the processor grants permission to use it. Therefore certain processors provide control lines to bring such information to processor’s notice in the control bus. Knowing these signals in detail is unnecessary but the general idea of the control bus must be conceived in full.


We take an example to explain the collaboration of the processor and memory using the address, control, and data buses. Consider that you want your uneducated servant to bring a book from the shelf. You order him to bring the fifth book from top of the shelf. All the data movement operations are hidden in this one sentence. Such a simple everyday phenomenon seen from this perspective explains the seemingly complex working of the three buses. We told the servant to “bring a book” and the one which is “fifth from top,” precise location even for the servant who is much more intelligent then our dumb memory. The dumb servant follows the steps one by one and the book is in your hand as a result. If however you just asked him for a book or you named the book, your uneducated servant will stand there gazing at you and the book will never come in your hand.
Even in this simplest of all examples, mathematics is there, “fifth from top.” Without a number the servant would not be able to locate the book. He is unable to understand your will. Then you tell him to put it with the seventh book on the right shelf. Precision is involved and only numbers are precise in this world. One will always be one and two will always be two. So we tell in the form of a number on the address bus which cell is needed out of say the 2000 cells in the whole memory.
A binary number is generated on the address bus, fifth, seventh, eighth, tenth; the cell which is needed. So the cell number is placed on the address bus. A memory cell is an n-bit location to store data, normally 8-bit also called a byte. The number of bits in a cell is called the cell width. The two dimensions, cell width and number of cells, define the memory completely just like the width and depth of a well defines it completely. 200 feet deep by 15 feet wide and the well is completely described. Similarly for memory we define two dimensions. The first dimension defines how many parallel bits are there in a single memory cell. The memory is called 8-bit or 16-bit for this reason and this is also the word size of the memory. This need not match the size of a processor word which has other parameters to define it. In general the memory cell cannot be wider than the width of the data bus. Best and simplest operation requires the same size of data bus and memory cell width.
 

As we previously discussed that the control bus carries the intent of the
 
Control bus is only the mechanism. The responsibility of sending the appropriate signals on the control bus to the memory is of the processor. Since the memory never wants to listen or to speak of itself. Then why is the control bus bidirectional. Again we take the same example of the servant and the book further to elaborate this situation. Consider that the servant went to fetch the book just to find that the drawing room door is locked. Now the servant can wait there indefinitely keeping us in surprise or come back and inform us about the situation so that we can act accordingly. The servant even though he was obedient was unable to fulfill our orders so in all his obedience, he came back to inform us about the problem. Synchronization is still important, as a result of our orders either we got the desired cell or we came to know that the memory is locked for the moment. Such information cannot be transferred via the address or the data bus. For such situations when peripherals want to talk to the processor when the processor wasn’t expecting them to speak, special lines in the control bus are used. The information in such signals is usually to indicate the incapability of the



1.2.	REGISTERS
 The basic purpose of a computer is to perform operations, and operations  need operands. Operands are the data on which we want to perform a certain  operation. Consider the addition operation; it involves adding two numbers  to get their sum. We can have precisely one address on the address bus and consequently precisely one element on the data bus. At the very same instant the second operand cannot be brought inside the processor. As soon as the second is selected, the first operand is no longer there. For this reason there are temporary storage places inside the processor called registers. Now one operand can be read in a register and added into the other which is read directly from the memory. Both are made accessible at one instance of time, one from inside the processor and one from outside on the data bus. The result can be written to at a distinct location as the operation has completed and we can access a different memory cell. Sometimes we hold both operands in registers for the sake of efficiency as what we can do inside the processor is undoubtedly faster than if we have to go outside and bring the second operand.
Registers are like a scratch pad ram inside the processor and their operation is very much like normal memory cells. They have precise locations and remember what is placed inside them. They are used when we need more than one data element inside the processor at one time. The concept of registers will be further elaborated as we progress into writing our first program.
Memory is a limited resource but the number of memory cells is large. Registers are relatively very small in number, and are therefore a very scarce and precious resource. Registers are more than one in number, so we have to  precisely identify or name them. Some manufacturers number their registers  like r0, r1, r2, others name them like A, B, C, D etc. Naming is useful since  the registers are few in number. This is called the nomenclature of the
 

particular architecture. Still other manufacturers name their registers according to their function like X stands for an index register. This also informs us that there are special functions of registers as well, some of which are closely associated to the particular architecture. For example index registers do not hold data instead they are used to hold the address of data. There are other functions as well and the whole spectrum of register functionalities is quite large. However most of the details will become clear as the registers of the Intel architecture are discussed in detail.

Accumulator 
There is a central register in every processor called the accumulator.  Traditionally all mathematical and logical operations are performed on the  accumulator. The word size of a processor is defined by the width of its  accumulator. A 32bit processor has an accumulator of 32 bits.

Pointer, Index, or Base Register
The name varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, but the basic distinguishing property is that it does not hold data but holds the address of data. The rationale can be understood by examining a “for” loop in a higher level language, zeroing elements in an array of ten elements located in consecutive memory cells. The location to be zeroed changes every iteration. That is the address where the operation is performed is changing. Index register is used in such a situation to hold the address of the current array location. Now the value in the index register cannot be treated as data, but it is the address of data. In general whenever we need access to a memory location whose address is not known until runtime we need an index
 
In newer architectures the distinction between accumulator and index registers has become vague. They have general registers which are more  versatile and can do both functions. They do have some specialized behaviors  but basic operations can be done on all general registers.
Flags Register or Program Status Word
  This is a special register in every architecture called the flags register or  the program status word. Like the accumulator it is an 8, 16, or 32 bits  register but unlike the accumulator it is meaningless as a unit, rather the  individual bits carry different meanings. The bits of the accumulator work in  parallel as a unit and each bit mean the same thing. The bits of the flags register work independently and individually, and combined its value is meaningless.
An example of a bit commonly present in the flags register is the carry flag. The carry can be contained in a single bit as in binary arithmetic the carry can only be zero or one. If a 16bit number is added to a 16bit accumulator, and the result is of 17 bits the 17th bit is placed in the carry bit of the flags register. Without this 17th bit the answer is incorrect. More examples of flags will be discussed when dealing with the Intel specific register set.

Program Counter or Instruction Pointer
Everything must translate into a binary number for our dumb processor to understand it, be it an operand or an operation itself. Therefore the instructions themselves must be translated into numbers. For example to add numbers we understand the word “add.” We translate this word into a number to make the processor understand it. This number is the actual instruction for the computer. All the objects, inheritance and encapsulation constructs in higher level languages translate down to just a number in assembly language in the end. Addition, multiplication, shifting; all big
 

 
third and so on. Instructions have a positional relationship. The whole logic depends on this positioning. If the computer executes the fifth instructions after the first and not the second, all our logic is gone. The processor should ensure this ordering of instructions. A special register exists in every  processor called the program counter or the instruction pointer that ensures  this ordering. “The program counter holds the address of the next instruction  to be executed.” A number is placed in the memory cell pointed to by this  register and that number tells the processor which instruction to execute; for  example 0xEA, 255, or 152. For the processor 152 might be the add  instruction. Just this one number tells it that it has to add, where its  operands are, and where to store the result. This number is called the  opcode. The instruction pointer moves from one opcode to the next. This is  how our program executes and progresses. One instruction is picked, its operands are read and the instruction is executed, then the next instruction is picked from the new address in instruction pointer and so on.
Remembering 152 for the add operation or 153 for the subtract operation is difficult. To make a simple way to remember difficult things we associate a symbol to every number. As when we write “add” everyone understands what we mean by it. Then we need a small program to convert this “add” of ours to
152 for the processor. Just a simple search and replace operation to translate all such symbols to their corresponding opcodes. We have mapped the numeric world of the processor to our symbolic world. “Add” conveys a meaning to us but the number 152 does not. We can say that add is closer to the programmer’s thinking. This is the basic motive of adding more and more translation layers up to higher level languages like C++ and Java and Visual Basic. These symbols are called instruction mnemonics. Therefore the mnemonic “add a to b” conveys more information to the reader. The dumb translator that will convert these mnemonics back to the original opcodes is a key program to be used throughout this course and is called the assembler.
1.3.	INSTRUCTION GROUPS
Usual opcodes in every processor exist for moving data, arithmetic and logical manipulations etc. However their mnemonics vary depending on the will of the manufacturer. Some manufacturers name the mnemonics for data  movement instructions as “move,” some call it “load” and “store” and still  other names are present. But the basic set of instructions is similar in every  processor. A grouping of these instructions makes learning a new processor  quick and easy. Just the group an instruction belongs tells a lot about the instruction.

Data Movement Instructions
mov ax, bx lad 1234

Arithmetic and Logic Instructions
Arithmetic instructions like addition, subtraction, multiplication, division  and  Logical  instructions  like  logical  and, logical or,  logical xor,  or complement are part of this group. Some examples are:
and  ax, 1234
add bx, 0534
add  bx, [1200]
 

The bracketed form is a complex variation meaning to add the data placed at address 1200. Addressing data in memory is a detailed topic and is discussed in the next chapter.

Program Control Instructions
The instruction pointer points to the next instruction and instructions run one after the other with the help of this register. We can say that the instructions are tied with one another. In some situations we don’t want to follow this implied path and want to order the processor to break its flow if some condition becomes true instead of the spatially placed next instruction. In certain other cases we want the processor to first execute a separate block of code and then come back to resume processing where it left.
These are instructions that control the program execution and flow by playing with the instruction pointer and altering its normal behavior to point to the next instruction. Some examples are:
cmp ax, 0
jne 1234
We are changing the program flow to the instruction at 1234 address if the condition that we checked becomes true.

Special Instructions 
 Another group called special instructions works like the special service  commandos. They allow changing specific processor behaviors and are used  to play with it. They are used rarely but are certainly used in any meaningful program. Some examples are:
cli sti
Where cli clears the interrupt flag and sti sets it. Without delving deep into it, consider that the cli instruction instructs the processor to close its ears from the outside world and never listen to what is happening outside, possibly to do some very important task at hand, while sti restores normal behavior. Since these instructions change the processor behavior they are placed in the special instructions group.

1.4.	INTEL IAPX88 ARCHITECTURE
Now we select a specific architecture to discuss these abstract ideas in concrete form. We will be using IBM PC based on Intel architecture because of its wide availability, because of free assemblers and debuggers available for it, and because of its wide use in a variety of domains. However the concepts discussed will be applicable on any other architecture as well; just the mnemonics of the particular language will be different.
Technically iAPX88 stands for “Intel Advanced Processor Extensions 88.” It was a very successful processor also called 8088 and was used in the very first IBM PC machines. Our discussion will revolve around 8088 in the first half of the course while in the second half we will use iAPX386 which is very advanced and powerful processor. 8088 is a 16bit processor with its  accumulator and all registers of 16 bits. 386 on the other hand, is a 32bit processor. However it is downward compatible with iAPX88 meaning that all code written for 8088 is valid on the 386. The architecture of a processor means the organization and functionalities of the registers it contains and the instructions that are valid on the processor. We will discuss the register architecture of 8088 in detail below while its instructions are discussed in the rest of the book at appropriate places.

1.5.	HISTORY
Intel did release some 4bit processors in the beginning but the first meaningful processor was 8080, an 8bit processor. The processor became
 

popular due to its simplistic design and versatile architecture. Based on the experience gained from 8080, an advanced version was released as 8085. The processor became widely popular in the engineering community again due to its simple and logical nature.
Intel introduced the first 16bit processor named 8088 at a time when the concept of personal computer was evolving. With a maximum memory of 64K on the 8085, the 8088 allowed a whole mega byte. IBM embedded this processor in their personal computer. The first machines ran at 4.43 MHz; a blazing speed at that time. This was the right thing at the right moment. No one expected this to become the biggest success of computing history. IBM PC XT became so popular and successful due to its open architecture and easily available information.
The success was unexpected for the developers themselves. As when Intel introduced the processor it contained a timer tick count which was valid for five years only. They never anticipated the architecture to stay around for more than five years but the history took a turn and the architecture is there at every desk even after 25 years and the tick is to be specially handled every now and then.

1.6.	REGISTER ARCHITECTURE
The iAPX88 architecture consists of 14 registers.

CS
DS
SS
ES
(AX)
(BX)
(CX)
(DX)


General Registers (AX, BX, CX, and DX)
The registers AX, BX, CX, and DX behave as general purpose registers in Intel architecture and do some specific functions in addition to it. X in their names stand for extended meaning 16bit registers. For example AX means  we are referring to the extended 16bit “A” register. Its upper and lower byte  are separately accessible as AH (A high byte) and AL (A low byte). All general purpose registers can be accessed as one 16bit register or as two 8bit registers. The two registers AH and AL are part of the big whole AX. Any change in AH or AL is reflected in AX as well. AX is a composite or extended register formed by gluing together the two parts AH and AL.
The A of AX stands for Accumulator. Even though all general purpose registers can act as accumulator in most instructions there are some specific variations which can only work on AX which is why it is named the accumulator. The B of BX stands for Base because of its role in memory addressing as discussed in the next chapter. The C of CX stands for Counter as there are certain instructions that work with an automatic count in the CX register. The D of DX stands for Destination as it acts as the destination in I/O operations. The A, B, C, and D are in letter sequence as well as depict some special functionality of the register.
 

Index Registers (SI and DI) 
SI and DI stand for source index and destination index respectively. These are the index registers of the Intel architecture which hold address of data and used in memory access. Being an open and flexible architecture, Intel allows many mathematical and logical operations on these registers as well like the general registers. The source and destination are named because of their implied functionality as the source or the destination in a special class of instructions called the string instructions. However their use is not at all restricted to string instructions. SI and DI are 16bit and cannot be used as 8bit register pairs like AX, BX, CX, and DX.

Instruction Pointer (IP) 
This is the special register containing the address of the next instruction to be executed. No mathematics or memory access can be done through this register. It is out of our direct control and is automatically used. Playing with it is dangerous and needs special care. Program control instructions change the IP register.

Stack Pointer (SP) 
It is a memory pointer and is used indirectly by a set of instructions. This register will be explored in the discussion of the system stack.

Base Pointer (BP) 
It is also a memory pointer containing the address in a special area of memory called the stack and will be explored alongside SP in the discussion of the stack.

Flags Register 
The flags register as previously discussed is not meaningful as a unit rather it is bit wise significant and accordingly each bit is named separately. The bits not named are unused. The Intel FLAGS register has its bits organized as follows:
15 14 13 12 11 10 9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	0
				O	D	I	T	S	Z		A		P		C
The individual flags are explained in the following table.

C	 Carry 	When two 16bit numbers are added the answer can be 17 bits long or when two 8bit numbers are added the answer can be 9 bits long. This extra bit that won’t fit in the target register is placed in the carry flag where it can be used and tested.
P	 Parity 	Parity is the number of “one” bits in a binary number. Parity is either odd or even.  This information is normally used in communications to verify the integrity of data sent from the sender to the receiver.
A	Auxiliary Carry	A number in base 16 is called a hex number and can be represented by 4 bits. The collection of 4 bits is called a nibble. During addition or subtraction if a carry goes from one nibble to the next this flag is set. Carry flag is for the carry from the whole addition while auxiliary carry is the carry from the first nibble to the second.
Z	Zero Flag	The Zero flag is set if the last mathematical or logical instruction has produced a zero in its destination.
 

S	Sign Flag	A signed number is represented in its two’s complement form in the computer. The most significant bit (MSB) of a negative number in this representation is 1 and for a positive number it is zero. The sign bit of the last mathematical or logical operation’s destination is copied into the sign flag.
T	Trap Flag	The trap flag has a special role in debugging which will be discussed later.
I	Interrupt Flag	It tells whether the processor can be interrupted from outside or not. Sometimes the programmer doesn’t want a particular task to be interrupted so the Interrupt flag can be zeroed for this time. The programmer rather than the processor sets this flag since the programmer knows when interruption is okay and when it is not. Interruption can be disabled or enabled by making this bit zero or one, respectively, using special instructions.
D	Direction Flag 	Specifically related to string instructions, this flag tells whether the current operation has to be done from bottom to top of the block (D=0) or from top to bottom of the block (D=1).
O	Overflow Flag	The overflow flag is set during signed arithmetic, e.g. addition or subtraction, when the sign of the destination changes unexpectedly. The actual process sets the overflow flag whenever the carry into the MSB is different from the carry out of the MSB

Segment Registers (CS, DS, SS, and ES)
The code segment register, data segment register, stack segment register, and the extra segment register are special registers related to the Intel segmented memory model and will be discussed later.

1.7.	OUR FIRST PROGRAM
The first program that we will write will only add three numbers. This very simple program will clarify most of the basic concepts of assembly language. We will start with writing our algorithm in English and then moving on to convert it into assembly language.

English Language Version
“Program is an ordered set of instructions for the processor.” Our first program will be instructions manipulating AX and BX in plain English.
move 5 to ax move 10 to bx add bx to ax move 15 to bx add bx to ax
Even in this simple reflection of thoughts in English, there are some key things to observe. One is the concept of destination as every instruction has a “to destination” part and there is a source before it as well. For example the second line has a constant 10 as its source and the register BX as its destination. The key point in giving the first program in English is to convey that the concepts of assembly language are simple but fine. Try to understand them considering that all above is everyday English that you know very well and every concept will eventually be applicable to assembly language.
 

Assembly Language Version
Intel could have made their assembly language exactly identical to our program in plain English but they have abbreviated a lot of symbols to avoid unnecessarily lengthy program when the meaning could be conveyed with less effort. For example Intel has named their move instruction “mov” instead of “move.” Similarly the Intel order of placing source and destination is opposite to what we have used in our English program, just a change of interpretation. So the Intel way of writing things is:
operation destination, source operation destination operation source
operation
The later three variations are for instructions that have one or both of their operands implied or they work on a single or no operand. An implied operand means that it is always in a particular register say the accumulator, and it need not be mentioned in the instruction. Now we attempt to write our program in actual assembly language of the iapx88.

Example 1.1
001	; a program to add three numbers using registers
002	[org 0x0100]
003	mov ax, 5	; load first number in ax

004	mov bx, 10	; load second number in bx
005	add ax, bx	; accumulate sum in ax
006	mov bx, 15	; load third number in bx
007	add ax, bx	; accumulate sum in ax
008	
009	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
010	int 0x21
001	To start a comment a semicolon is used and the assembler ignores
	everything else on the same line. Comments must be extensively
	used in assembly language programs to make them readable.
002	Leave the org directive for now as it will be discussed later.
003	The constant 5 is loaded in one register AX.
004	The constant 10 is loaded in another register BX.
005	Register BX is added to register AX and the result is stored in
	register AX. Register AX should contain 15 by now.
006	The constant 15 is loaded in the register BX.
007	Register BX is again added to register AX now producing 15+15=30 
	in the AX register. So the program has computed 5+10+15=30.

008	Vertical spacing must also be used extensively in assembly language
	programs to separate logical blocks of code.
009-010	The ending lines are related more to the operating system than to
	assembly language programming. It is a way to inform DOS that our
	program has  terminated  so  it  can display  its  command  prompt
	again.  The  computer  may  reboot  or  behave  improperly  if  this
	termination is not present.


Assembler, Linker, and Debugger 
We need an assembler to assemble this program and convert this into executable binary code. The assembler that we will use during this course is “Netwide Assembler” or NASM. It is a free and open source assembler. And the tool that will be most used will be the debugger. We will use a free debugger called “A fullscreen debugger” or AFD. These are the whole set of
 

weapons an assembly language programmer needs for any task whatsoever at hand.
To assemble we will give the following command to the processor assuming that our input file is named EX01.ASM.
nasm ex01.asm –o ex01.com –l ex01.lst
This will produce two files EX01.COM that is our executable file and EX01.LST that is a special listing file that we will explore now. The listing file produced for our example above is shown below with comments removed for neatness.

1			
2		[org 0x0100]	
3	00000000 B80500		mov	ax, 5
4	00000003 BB0A00		mov	bx, 10
5	00000006 01D8		add	ax, bx
6	00000008 BB0F00		mov	bx, 15
7	0000000B 01D8		add	ax, bx
8				
9	0000000D B8004C		mov	ax, 0x4c00
10	00000010 CD21		int	0x21

The first column in the above listing is offset of the listed instruction in the output file. Next column is the opcode into which our instruction was translated. In this case this opcode is B8. Whenever we move a constant into AX register the opcode B8 will be used. After it 0500 is appended which is the immediate operand to this instruction. An immediate operand is an operand which is placed directly inside the instruction. Now as the AX register is a word sized register, and one hexadecimal digit takes 4 bits so 4 hexadecimal digits make one word or two bytes. Which of the two bytes should be placed first in the instruction, the least significant or the most significant? Similarly for 32bit numbers either the order can be most significant, less significant, lesser significant, and least significant called the big-endian order used by Motorola and some other companies or it can be least significant, more significant, more significant, and most significant called the little-endian order and is used by Intel. The big-endian have the argument that it is more natural to read and comprehend while the little- endian have the argument that this scheme places the less significant value at a lesser address and more significant value at a higher address.
Because of this the constant 5 in our instruction was converted into 0500 with the least significant byte of 05 first and the most significant byte of 00 afterwards. When read as a word it is 0005 but when written in memory it will become 0500. As the first instruction is three bytes long, the listing file shows that the offset of the next instruction in the file is 3. The opcode BB is for moving a constant into the BX register, and the operand 0A00 is the number 10 in little-endian byte order. Similarly the offsets and opcodes of the remaining instructions are shown in order. The last instruction is placed at offset 0x10 or 16 in decimal. The size of the last instruction is two bytes, so the size of the complete COM file becomes 18 bytes. This can be verified from the directory listing, using the DIR command, that the COM file produced is exactly 18 bytes long.
Now the program is ready to be run inside the debugger. The debugger shows the values of registers, flags, stack, our code, and one or two areas of the system memory as data. Debugger allows us to step our program one instruction at a time and observe its effect on the registers and program data. The details of using the AFD debugger can be seen from the AFD manual.
After loading the program in the debugger observe that the first instruction is now at 0100 instead of absolute zero. This is the effect of the org directive at the start of our program. The first instruction of a COM file must be at
 

offset 0100 (decimal 255) as a requirement. Also observe that the debugger is showing your program even though it was provided only the COM file and neither of the listing file or the program source. This is because the translation from mnemonic to opcode is reversible and the debugger mapped back from the opcode to the instruction mnemonic. This will become apparent for instructions that have two mnemonics as the debugger might not show the one that was written in the source file.
As a result of program execution either registers or memory will change. Since our program yet doesn’t touch memory the only changes will be in the registers. Keenly observe the registers AX, BX, and IP change after every instruction. IP will change after every instruction to point to the next instruction while AX will accumulate the result of our addition.

1.8.	SEGMENTED MEMORY MODEL

Rationale
In earlier processors like  8080 and 8085 the linear memory model was used to access memory. In linear memory model the whole memory appears like a single array of data. 8080 and 8085 could access a total memory of 64K using the 16 lines of their address bus. When designing iAPX88 the Intel designers wanted to remain compatible with 8080 and 8085 however 64K was too small to continue with, for their new processor. To get the best of both worlds they introduced the segmented memory model in 8088.
There is also a logical argument in favor of a segmented memory model in addition to the issue of compatibility discussed above. We have two logical parts of our program, the code and the data, and actually there is a third part called the program stack as well, but higher level languages make this invisible to us. These three logical parts of a program should appear as three distinct units in memory, but making this division is not possible in the linear memory model. The segmented memory model does allow this distinction.

Mechanism 
The segmented memory model allows multiple functional windows into the main memory, a code window, a data window etc. The processor sees code from the code window and data from the data window. The size of one  window is restricted to 64K. 8085 software fits in just one such window. It sees code, data, and stack from this one window, so downward compatibility is attained.
However the maximum memory iAPX88  can access is 1MB  which can be accessed with 20 bits. Compare this with the 64K of 8085 that were accessed using 16 bits. The idea is that the 64K window just discussed can be moved anywhere in the whole 1MB. The four segment registers discussed in the Intel register architecture are used for this purpose. Therefore four windows can exist at one time. For example one window that is pointed to by the CS register contains the currently executing code.
To understand the concept, consider the windows of a building. We say that a particular window is 3 feet above  the floor and another one is 20 feet above the floor. The reference point, the floor is the base of the segment called the datum point in a graph and all measurement is done from that datum point considering it to be zero. So CS holds the zero or the base of code. DS holds the zero of data. Or we can say CS tells how high code from the floor is, and DS tells how high data from the floor is, while SS tells how high the stack is. One extra segment ES can be used if we need to access two distant areas of memory at the same time that both cannot be seen through the same window. ES also has special role in string instructions. ES is used as an extra data segment and cannot be used as an extra code or stack segment.
 

Revisiting the concept again, like the datum point of a graph, the segment registers tell the start of our window which can be opened anywhere in the megabyte of memory available. The window is of a fixed size of 64KB. Base and offset are the two key variables in a segmented address. Segment tells the base while offset is added into it. The registers IP, SP, BP, SI, DI, and BX all can contain a 16bit offset in them and access memory relative to a segment base.
The IP register cannot work alone. It needs the CS register to open a 64K window in the 1MB memory  and then IP works to select code from this window as offsets. IP works only inside this window and cannot go outside of this 64K in any case. If the window is moved i.e. the CS register is changed, IP will change its behavior accordingly and start selecting from the new window. The IP register always works relatively, relative to the segment base stored in the CS register. IP is a 16bit register capable of accessing only 64K memory so how the whole megabyte can contain code anywhere. Again the same concept is there, it can access 64K at one instance of time. As the base is changed using the CS register, IP can be made to point anywhere in the whole megabyte. The process is illustrated with the following diagram.

Physical Address
	 00000
Segment Base
		xxxx0
Paragraph Boundary










	 FFFFF

Physical Address Calculation
Now for the whole megabyte we need 20 bits while CS and IP are both 16bit registers. We need a mechanism to make a 20bit number out of the two 16bit numbers. Consider that the segment value is stored as a 20 bit number with the lower four bits zero and the offset value is stored as another 20 bit number with the upper four bits zeroed. The two are added to produce a 20bit absolute address. A carry if generated is dropped without being stored  anywhere and the phenomenon is called address wraparound. The process is  explained with the help of the following diagram.
 

 
15	0

 

15	0
 


Segment Address



Offset Address
 

 

19	0


Therefore memory is determined by a segment-offset pair and not alone by any one register which will be an ambiguous reference. Every offset register is assigned a default segment register to resolve such ambiguity. For example the program we wrote when loaded into memory had a value of 0100 in IP register and some value say 1DDD in the CS register. Making both 20 bit numbers, the segment base is 1DDD0 and the offset is 00100 and adding them we get the physical memory address of 1DED0 where the opcode B80500 is placed.

Paragraph Boundaries 
As the segment value is a 16bit number and four zero bits are appended to the right to make it a 20bit number, segments can only be defined a 16byte boundaries called paragraph boundaries. The first possible segment value is 0000 meaning a physical base of 00000 and the next possible value of 0001 means a segment base of 00010 or 16 in decimal. Therefore segments can only be defined at 16 byte boundaries.

Overlapping Segments 
We can also observe that in the case of our program CS, DS, SS, and ES  all had the same value in them. This is called overlapping segments so that we can see the same memory from any window. This is the structure of a COM file.
Using partially overlapping segments we can produce a number of segment, offset pairs that all access the same memory. For example 1DDD:0100 and IDED:0000 both point to the same physical memory. To test this we can open a data window at 1DED:0000 in the debugger and change the first three bytes to “90” which is the opcode for NOP (no operation). The change is immediately visible in the code window which is pointed to by CS containing 1DDD. Similarly IDCD:0200 also points to the same memory location. Consider this like a portion of wall that three different people on three different floors are seeing through their own windows. One of them painted the wall red; it will be changed for all of them though their perspective is different. It is the same phenomenon occurring here.
The segment, offset pair is called a logical address, while the 20bit address is a physical address which is the real thing. Logical addressing is a mechanism to access the physical memory. As we have seen three different logical addresses accessed the same physical address.
 

00000
1DCD0

1DDD0











FFFFF


EXERCISES
1.	How the processor uses the address bus, the data bus, and the control bus to communicate with the system memory?
2.	Which of the following are unidirectional and which are bidirectional?
a.	Address Bus
b.	Data Bus
c.	Control Bus
3.	What are registers and what are the specific features of the accumulator, index registers, program counter, and program status word?
4.	What is the size of the accumulator of a 64bit processor?
5.	What is the difference between an instruction mnemonic and its opcode?
6.	How are instructions classified into groups?
7.	A combination of 8bits is called a byte. What is the name for 4bits and for 16bits?
8.	What is the maximum memory 8088 can access?
9.	List down the 14 registers of the 8088 architecture and briefly describe their uses.
10.	What flags are defined in the 8088 FLAGS register? Describe the function of the zero flag, the carry flag, the sign flag, and the overflow flag.
11.	Give the value of the zero flag, the carry flag, the sign flag, and the overflow flag after each of the following instructions if AX is initialized with 0x1254 and BX is initialized with 0x0FFF.
a.	add ax, 0xEDAB
b.	add ax, bx
c.	add bx, 0xF001
12.	What is the difference between little endian and big endian formats? Which format is used by the Intel 8088 microprocessor?
13.	For each of the following words identify the byte that is stored at lower memory address and the byte that is stored at higher memory address in a little endian computer.
a.	1234
b.	ABFC
c.	B100
d.	B800
 

14.	What are the contents of memory locations 200, 201, 202, and 203 if the word 1234 is stored at offset 200 and the word 5678 is stored at offset 202?
15.	What is the offset at which the first executable instruction of a COM file must be placed?
16.	Why was segmentation originally introduced in 8088 architecture?
17.	Why a segment start cannot start from the physical address 55555.
18.	Calculate the physical memory address generated by the following segment offset pairs.
a.	1DDD:0436
b.	1234:7920
c.	74F0:2123
d.	0000:6727
e.	FFFF:4336
f.	1080:0100
g.	AB01:FFFF
19.	What are the first and the last physical memory addresses accessible using the following segment values?
a.	1000
b.	0FFF
c.	1002
d.	0001
e.	E000
20.	Write instructions that perform the following operations.
a.	Copy BL into CL
b.	Copy DX into AX
c.	Store 0x12 into AL
d.	Store 0x1234 into AX
e.	Store 0xFFFF into AX
21.	Write a program in assembly language that calculates the square of six by adding six to the accumulator six times.
 
2
Addressing Modes 

2.1.	DATA DECLARATION
The first instruction of our first assembly language program was “mov ax,
5.” Here MOV was the opcode; AX was the destination operand, while 5 was the source operand. The value of 5 in this case was stored as part of the instruction encoding. In the opcode B80500, B8 was the opcode and 0500 was the operand stored immediately afterwards. Such an operand is called  an immediate operand. It is one of the many types of operands available.
Writing programs using just the immediate operand type is difficult. Every reasonable program needs some data in memory apart from constants. Constants cannot be changed, i.e. they cannot appear as the destination operand. In fact placing them as destination is meaningless and illegal according to assembly language syntax. Only registers or data placed in memory can be changed. So real data is the one stored in memory, with a very few constants. So there must be a mechanism in assembly language to store and retrieve data from memory.
To declare a part of our program as holding data instead of instructions we need a couple of very basic but special assembler directives. The first directive is “define byte” written as “db.”
db	somevalue
As a result a cell in memory will be reserved containing the desired value in it and it can be used in a variety of ways. Now we can add variables instead of constants. The other directive is “define word” or “dw” with the same syntax as “db” but reserving a whole word of 16 bits instead of a byte. There are directives to declare a double or a quad word as well but we will restrict ourselves to byte and word declarations for now. For single byte we use db and for two bytes we use dw.
To refer to this variable later in the program, we need the address occupied by this variable. The assembler is there to help us. We can associate a symbol with any address that we want to remember and use that symbol in the rest of the code. The symbol is there for our own comprehension of code. The assembler will calculate the address of that symbol using our origin directive and calculating the instruction lengths or data declarations in- between and replace all references to the symbol with the corresponding address. This is just like variables in a higher level language, where the compiler translates them into addresses; just the process is hidden from the programmer one level further. Such a symbol associated to a point in the program is called a label and is written as the label name followed by a colon.

2.2.	DIRECT ADDRESSING 
Now we will rewrite our first program such that the numbers 5, 10, and 15 are stored as memory variables instead of constants and we access them from there.

 

004		mov	bx, [num2]	; load second number in bx
005		add	ax, bx	; accumulate sum in ax
006		mov	bx, [num3]	; load third number in bx
007		add	ax, bx	; accumulate sum in ax
008		mov	[num4], ax	; store sum in num4
009				
010		mov	ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
011		int	0x21	
012				
013	num1:	dw	5	
014	num2:	dw	10	
015	num3:	dw	15	
016	num4:	dw	0	
002	Originate our program at 0100. The first executable instruction
	should be placed at this offset.
003	The source operand is changed from constant 5 to [num1]. The
	bracket is signaling that the operand is placed in memory at address
	num1. The value 5 will be loaded in ax even though we did not
	specified it in our program code, rather the value will be picked from
	memory. The instruction should be read as “read the contents of
	memory location num1 in the ax register.” The label num1 is a
	symbol for us but an address for the processor while the conversion
	is done by the assembler.
013	The label num1 is defined as a word and the assembler is requested
	to place 5 in that memory location. The colon signals that num1 is a
	label and not an instruction.

Using the same process to assemble as discussed before we examine the listing file generated as a result with comments removed.

1	
2			[org 0x0100]		
3	00000000	A1[1700]		mov	ax, [num1]
4	00000003	8B1E[1900]		mov	bx, [num2]
5	00000007	01D8		add	ax, bx
6	00000009	8B1E[1B00]		mov	bx, [num3]
7	0000000D	01D8		add	ax, bx
8	0000000F	A3[1D00]		mov	[num4], ax
9					
10	00000012	B8004C		mov	ax, 0x4c00
11	00000015	CD21		int	0x21
12					
13	00000017	0500	num1:	dw	5
14	00000019	0A00	num2:	dw	10
15	0000001B	0F00	num3:	dw	15
16	0000001D	0000	num4:	dw	0

The first instruction of our program has changed from B80500 to A11700. The opcode B8 is used to move constants into AX, while the opcode A1 is used when moving data into AX from memory. The immediate operand to our new instruction is 1700 or as a word 0017 (23 decimal) and from the bottom of the listing file we can observe that this is the offset of num1. The assembler has calculated the offset of num1 and used it to replace references to num1 in the whole program. Also the value 0500 can be seen at offset 0017 in the file. We can say contents of memory location 0017 are 0005 as a word. Similarly num2, num3, and num4 are placed at 0019, 001B, and 001D addresses.
When the program is loaded in the debugger, it is loaded at offset 0100, which displaces all memory accesses in our program. The instruction A11700 is changed to A11701 meaning that our variable is now placed at 0117 offset. The instruction is shown as mov ax, [0117]. Also the data window can be used to verify that offset 0117 contains the number 0005.
 

Execute the program step by step and examine how the memory is read and the registers are updated, how the instruction pointer moves forward, and how the result is saved back in memory. Also observe inside the debugger code window below the code for termination, that the debugger is interpreting our data as code and showing it as some meaningless instructions. This is because the debugger sees everything as code in the code window and cannot differentiate our declared data from opcodes. It is our responsibility that we terminate execution before our data is executed as code.
Also observe that our naming of num1, num2, num3, and num4 is no longer there inside the debugger. The debugger is only showing the numbers 0117, 0119, 011B, and 011D. Our numerical machine can only work with  numbers. We used symbols for our ease to label or tag certain positions in  our program. The assembler converts these symbols into the appropriate  numbers automatically. Also observe that the effect of “dw” is to place 5 in  two bytes as 0005. Had we used “db” this would have been stored as 05 in one byte.
Given the fact that the assembler knows only numbers we can write the same program using a single label. As we know that num2 is two ahead of num1, we can use num1+2 instead of num2 and let the assembler calculate the sum during assembly process.

Example 2.2
001	; a program to add three numbers accessed using a single label
002	[org 0x0100]
003	mov ax, [num1]	; load first number in ax
004	mov bx, [num1+2]	; load second number in bx
005	add ax, bx	; accumulate sum in ax
006	mov bx, [num1+4]	; load third number in bx
007	add ax, bx	; accumulate sum in ax
008	mov [num1+6], ax	; store sum at num1+6
009	
010	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
011	int 0x21
012	
013	num1:	dw	5
014	dw	10
015	dw	15
016	dw	0
004	The second number is read from num1+2. Similarly the third

	number is read from num1+4 and the result is accessed at num1+6.
013-016	The labels num2, num3, and num4 are removed and the data there
	will be accessed with reference to num1.

Every location is accessed with reference to num1 in this example. The expression “num1+2” comprises of constants only and can be evaluated at the time of assembly. There are no variables involved in this expression. As we open the program inside the debugger we see a verbatim copy of the previous program. There is no difference at all since the assembler catered for the differences during assembly. It calculated 0117+2=0119 while in the previous it directly knew from the value of num2 that it has to write 0119, but the end result is a ditto copy of the previous execution.
Another way to declare the above data and produce exactly same results is shown in the following example.

Example 2.3
001
002
003
004	; a program to add three numbers accessed using a single label [org 0x0100]
mov ax, [num1]	; load first number in ax mov bx, [num1+2]	; load second number in bx
 

005		add	ax, bx	;	accumulate sum in ax
006		mov	bx, [num1+4]	;	load third number in bx
007		add	ax, bx	;	accumulate sum in ax
008		mov	[num1+6], ax	;	store sum at num1+6
009					
010		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
011		int	0x21		
012					
013	num1:	dw	5, 10, 15, 0		
013	As we do not need to place labels on individual variables we can save space and declare all data on a single line separated by commas. This declaration will declare four words in consecutive memory locations while the address of first one is num1.
The method used to access memory in the above examples is called direct addressing. In direct addressing the memory address is fixed and is given in the instruction. The actual data used is placed in memory and now that data
 
memory is read in a word sized register. A last observation is that the data 0500 in memory was corrected to 0005 when read in a register. So registers contain data in proper order as a word.
A last variation using direct addressing shows that we can directly add a memory variable and a register instead of adding a register into another that we were doing till now.

We generate the following listing file as a result of the assembly process described previously. Comments are again removed.

1			
2		[org 0x0100]	
3	00000000 A1[1900]		mov	ax, [num1]
4	00000003 A3[1F00]		mov	[num1+6], ax
5	00000006 A1[1B00]		mov	ax, [num1+2]
6	00000009 0106[1F00]		add	[num1+6], ax
7	0000000D A1[1D00]		mov	ax, [num1+4]
8	00000010 0106[1F00]		add	[num1+6], ax
9				
10	00000014 B8004C		mov	ax, 0x4c00
11	00000017 CD21		int	0x21
12				
13	00000019 05000A000F000000	num1:	dw	5, 10, 15, 0

The opcode of add is changed because the destination is now a memory location instead of a register. No other significant change is seen in the listing file. Inside the debugger we observe that few opcodes are longer now and the location num1 is now translating to 0119 instead of 0117. This is done automatically by the assembler as a result of using labels instead of
 

hard coding addresses. During execution we observe that the word data as it is read into a register is read in correct order. The significant change in this example is that the destination of addition is memory. Method to access memory is direct addressing, whether it is the MOV instruction or the ADD instruction.
The first two instructions of the last program read a number into AX and placed it at another memory location. A quick thought reveals that the following might be a possible single instruction to replace the couple.
mov [num1+6], [num1]	; ILLEGAL
However this form is illegal and not allowed on the Intel architecture. None  of the general operations of mov add, sub etc. allow moving data from memory to memory. Only register to register, register to memory, memory to register, constant to memory, and constant to register operations are allowed. The other register to constant, memory to constant, and memory to  memory are all disallowed. Only string instructions allow moving data from  memory to memory and will be discussed in detail later. As a rule one instruction can have at most one operand in brackets, otherwise assembler will give an error.

2.3.	SIZE MISMATCH ERRORS 
If we change the directive in the last example from DW to DB, the program will still assemble and debug without errors, however the results will not be the same as expected. When the first operand is read 0A05 will be read in the register which was actually two operands place in consecutive byte memory locations. The second number will be read as 000F which is the zero byte of num4 appended to the 15 of num3. The third number will be junk depending on the current state of the machine. According to our data declaration the third number should be at 0114 but it is accessed at 011D calculated with word offsets. This is a logical error of the program. To keep the declarations and their access synchronized is the responsibility of the programmer and not the assembler. The assembler allows the programmer to do everything he wants to do, and that can possibly run on the processor. The assembler only keeps us from writing illegal instructions which the processor cannot execute. This is the difference between a syntax error and a logic error. So the assembler and debugger have both done what we asked them to do but the programmer asked them to do the wrong chore.
  The programmer is responsible for accessing the data as word if it was  declared as a word and accessing it as a byte if it was declared as a byte. The  word case is shown in lot of previous examples. If however the intent is to treat it as a byte the following code shows the appropriate way.

Example 2.5
001	; a program to add three numbers using byte variables
002	[org 0x0100]
003	mov al, [num1]	; load first number in al
004	mov bl, [num1+1]	; load second number in bl
005	add al, bl	; accumulate sum in al
006	mov bl, [num1+2]	; load third number in bl
007	add al, bl	; accumulate sum in al
008	mov [num1+3], al	; store sum at num1+3
009	
010	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
011	int 0x21
012	
013	num1:	db	5, 10, 15, 0
003	The number is read in AL register which is a byte register since the
	memory location read is also of byte size.
005	The second number is now placed at num1+1 instead of num1+2
	because of byte offsets.
 

013	To declare data db is used instead of dw so that each data declared occupies one byte only.

Inside the debugger we observe that the AL register takes appropriate values and the sum is calculated and stored in num1+3. This time there is no alignment or synchronization error. The key thing to understand here is that the processor does not match defines to accesses. It is the programmer’s responsibility. In general assembly language gives a lot of power to the programmer but power comes with responsibility. Assembly language programming is not a difficult task but a responsible one.
In the above examples, the processor knew the size of the data movement operation from the size of the register involved, for example in “mov ax, [num1]” memory can be accessed as byte or as word, it has no hard and fast size, but the AX register tells that this operation has to be a word operation. Similarly in “mov al, [num1]” the AL register tells that this operation has to be a byte operation. However in “mov ax, bl” the AX register tells that the operation has to be a word operation while BL tells that this has to be a byte operation. The assembler will declare that this is an illegal instruction. A 5Kg bag cannot fit inside a 1Kg bag and according to Intel a 1Kg cannot also fit in a 5Kg bag. They must match in size. The instruction “mov [num1], [num2]” is illegal as previously discussed not because of data movement size but because memory to memory moves are not allowed at all.
The instruction “mov [num1], 5” is legal but there is no way for the processor to know the data movement size in this operation. The variable num1 can be treated as a byte or as a word and similarly 5 can be treated as a byte or as a word. Such instructions are declared ambiguous by the assembler. The assembler has no way to guess the intent of the programmer as it previously did using the size of the register involved but there is no register involved this time. And memory is a linear array and label is an address in it. There is no size associated with a label. Therefore to resolve its ambiguity we clearly tell our intent to the assembler in one of the following ways.
mov byte [num1], 5 mov word [num1], 5

2.4.	REGISTER INDIRECT ADDRESSING 
  We have done very elementary data access till now. Assume that the  numbers we had were 100 and not just three. This way of adding them will  cost us 200 instructions. There must be some method to do a task repeatedly on data placed in consecutive memory cells. The key to this is the need for some register that can hold the address of data. So that we can change the address to access some other cell of memory using the same instruction. In direct addressing mode the memory cell accessed was fixed inside the instruction. There is another method in which the address can be placed in a register so that it can be changed. For the following example we will take 10 instead of 100 numbers but the algorithm is extensible to any size.
There are four registers in iAPX88 architecture that can hold address of data and they are BX, BP, SI, and DI.  There are minute differences in their working which will be discussed later. For the current example, we will use the BX register and we will take just three numbers and extend the concept with more numbers in later examples.

 

006
	add	ax, [bx]		; add second number to ax
007		add	bx, 2		; advance bx to third number
008		add	ax, [bx]		; add third number to ax
009		add	bx, 2		; advance bx to result
010		mov	[bx], ax		; store sum at num1+6
011					
012		mov	ax, 0x4c00		; terminate program
013		int	0x21		
014					
015	num1:	dw	5, 10, 15,	0	
003	Observe that no square brackets around num1 are used this time. The address is loaded in bx and not the contents. Value of num1 is 0005 and the address is 0117. So BX will now contain 0117.
004	 Brackets are now used around BX. In iapx88 architecture brackets can be used around BX, BP, SI, and DI only. In iapx386 more registers are allowed. The instruction will be read as “move into ax the contents of the memory location whose address is in bx.” Now since bx contains the address of num1 the contents of num1 are
transferred to the ax register. Without square brackets the meaning of the instruction would have been totally different.
005	This instruction is changing the address. Since we have words not bytes, we add two to bx so that it points to the next word in memory.
BX now contains 0119 the address of the second word in memory. This was the mechanism to change addresses that we needed.

Inside the debugger we observe that the first instruction is “mov bx, 011C.” A constant is moved into BX. This is because we did not use the square brackets around “num1.” The address of “num1” has moved to 011C because the code size has changed due to changed instructions. In the second instruction BX points to 011C and the value read in AX is 0005 which can be verified from the data window. After the addition BX points to 011E containing 000A, our next word, and so on. This way the BX register points to our words one after another and we can add them using the same instruction “mov ax, [bx]” without fixing the address of our data in the instructions. We can also subtract from BX to point to previous cells. The address to be accessed is now in total program control.
One thing that we needed in our problem to add hundred numbers was the capability to change address. The second thing we need is a way to repeat the same instruction and a way to know that the repetition is done a 100 times, a terminal condition for the repetition. For the task we are introducing two new instructions that you should read and understand as simple English language concepts. For simplicity only 10 numbers are added in this example. The algorithm is extensible to any size.

Example 2.7
001	; a program to add ten numbers
002	[org 0x0100]
003	mov bx, num1	; point bx to first number
004	mov cx, 10	; load count of numbers in cx
005	mov ax, 0	; initialize sum to zero
006	
007	l1:	add ax, [bx]	; add number to ax
008	add bx, 2	; advance bx to next number
009	sub cx, 1	; numbers to be added reduced
010	jnz l1	; if numbers remain add next
011	
012	mov [total], ax	; write back sum in memory
013	
014	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
015	int 0x21
016	
017	num1:	dw	10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50
 












 







e









The CX register is used as a counter in this example, BX contains the changing address, while AX accumulates the result. We have formed a loop in assembly language that executes until its condition remains true. Inside the debugger we can observe that the subtract instruction clears the zero flag the first nine times and sets it on the tenth time. While the jump instruction moves execution to address l1 the first nine times and to the following line the tenth time. The jump instruction breaks program flow.
The JNZ instruction is from the program control group and is a conditional jump, meaning that if the condition NZ is true (ZF=0) it will jump to the address mentioned and otherwise it will progress to the next instruction. It is a selection between two paths. If the condition is true go right and otherwise go left. Or we can say if the weather is hot, go this way, and if it is cold, go this way. Conditional jump is the most important instruction, as it gives the processor decision making capability, so it must be given a careful thought. Some processors call it branch, probably a more logical name for it, however the functionality is same. Intel chose to name it “jump.”
  An important thing in the above example is that a register is used to  reference memory so this form of access is called register indirect memory  access. We used the BX register for it and the B in BX and BP stands for  base therefore we call register indirect memory access using BX or BP, “based addressing.”  Similarly when SI or DI is used we name the method “indexed addressing.” They have the same functionality, with minor differences because of which the two are called base and index. The differences will be explained later, however for the above example SI or DI could be used as well, but we would name it indexed addressing instead of based addressing.
 

2.5.	REGISTER + OFFSET ADDRESSING 
Direct addressing and indirect addressing using a single register are two  basic forms of memory access. Another possibility is to use different combinations of direct and indirect references. In the above example we used BX to access different array elements which were placed consecutively in memory like an array. We can also place in BX only the array index and not the exact address and form the exact address when we are going to access the actual memory. This way the same register can be used for accessing different arrays and also the register can be used for index comparison like the following example does.

Example 2.8
001	; a program to add ten numbers using register + offset addressing
002	[org 0x0100]
003	mov bx, 0	; initialize array index to zero
004	mov cx, 10	; load count of numbers in cx
005	mov ax, 0	; initialize sum to zero
006	
007	l1:	add ax, [num1+bx]	; add number to ax
008	add bx, 2	; advance bx to next index
009	sub cx, 1	; numbers to be added reduced
010	jnz l1	; if numbers remain add next
011	
012	mov [total], ax	; write back sum in memory
013	
014	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
015	int 0x21
016	
017	num1:	dw	10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50
018	total:	dw	0
003	This time BX is initialized to zero instead of array base
007	The format of memory access has changed. The array base is added
	to BX containing array index at the time of memory access.
008	As the array is of words, BX jumps in steps of two, i.e. 0, 2, 4.
	Higher level languages do appropriate incrementing themselves and
	we always use sequential array indexes. However in assembly
	language we always calculate in bytes and therefore we need to take
	care of the size of one array element which in this case is two.

Inside the debugger we observe that the memory access instruction is shown as “mov ax, [011F+bx]” and the actual memory accessed is the one whose address is the sum of 011F and the value contained in the BX register. This form of access is of the register indirect family and is called base + offset or index + offset depending on whether BX or BP is used or SI or DI is used.

2.6.	SEGMENT ASSOCIATION 
 All the addressing mechanisms in iAPX88 return a number called effective  address. For example in base + offset addressing, neither the base nor the  offset alone tells the desired cell in memory to be accessed. It is only after the addition is done that the processor knows which cell to be accessed. This number which came as the result of addition is called the effective address. But the effective address is just an offset and is meaningless without a segment. Only after the segment is known, we can form the physical address that is needed to access a memory cell.
We discussed the segmented memory model of iAPX88 in reasonable detail at the end of previous chapter. However during the discussion of addressing modes we have not seen the effect of segments. Segmentation is there and it’s all happening relative to a segment base. We saw DS, CS, SS, and ES
 

inside the debugger. Everything is relative to its segment base, even though we have not explicitly explained its functionality. An offset alone is not complete without a segment. As previously discussed there is a default segment associated to every register which accesses memory. For example CS is associated to IP by default; rather it is tied with it. It cannot access memory in any other segment.
In case of data, there is a bit relaxation and nothing is tied. Rather there is a default association which can be overridden. In the case of register indirect memory access, if the register used is one of SI, DI, or BX the default segment is DS. If however the register used is BP the default segment used is
SS. The stack segment has a very critical and fine use and there is a reason why BP is attached to SS by default. However these will be discussed in detail in the chapter on stack. IP is tied to CS while SP is tied to SS. The association of these registers cannot be changed; they are locked with no option. Others are not locked and can be changed.
To override the association for one instruction of one of the registers BX, BP, SI or DI, we use the segment override prefix. For example “mov ax, [cs:bx]” associates BX with CS for this one instruction. For the next instruction the default association will come back to act. The processor places a special byte before the instruction called a prefix, just like prefixes and suffixes in English language. No prefix is needed or placed for default association. For example for CS the byte 2E is placed and for ES the byte 26 is placed. Opcode has not changed, but the prefix byte has modified the default association to association with the desired segment register for this one instruction.
In all our examples, we never declared a segment or used it explicitly, but everything seemed to work fine. The important thing to note is that CS, DS, SS, and ES all had the same value. The value itself is not important but the fact that all had the same value is important. All four segment windows exactly overlap. Whatever segment register we use the same physical memory will be accessed. That is why everything was working without the mention of a single segment register. This is the formation of COM files in IBM PC. A single segment contains code, data, and the stack. This format is operating system dependant, in our case defined by DOS. And our operating system defines the format of COM files such that all segments have the same value. Thus the only meaningful thing that remains is the offset.
For example if BX=0100, SI=0200, and CS=1000 and the memory access under consideration is [cs:bx+si+0x0700], the effective address formed is bx+si+0700 = 0100 + 0200 + 0700 = 0A00. Now multiplying the segment value by 16 makes it 10000 and adding the effective address 00A00 forms the physical address 10A00.

2.7.	ADDRESS WRAPAROUND
There are two types of wraparounds. One is within a single segment and the other is inside the whole physical memory. Segment wraparound occurs when during the effective address calculation a carry is generated. This carry is dropped giving the effect that when we try to access beyond the segment limit, we are actually wrapped around to the first cell in the segment. For example if BX=9100, DS=1500 and the access is [bx+0x7000] we form the effective address 9100 + 7000 = 10100. The carry generated is dropped forming the actual effective address of 0100. Just like a circle when we reached the end we started again from the beginning. An arc at 370 degrees is the same as an arc at 10 degrees. We tried to cross the segment boundary and it pushed us back to the start. This is called segment wraparound. The physical address in the above example will be 15100.
The same can also happen at the time of physical address calculation. For example BX=0100, DS=FFF0 and the access under consideration is [bx+0x0100]. The effective address will be 0200 and the physical address will
 

be 100100. This is a 21bit answer and cannot be sent on the address bus which is 20 bits wide. The carry is dropped and just like the segment wraparound our physical memory has wrapped around at its very top. When we tried to access beyond limits the actual access is made at the very start. This second wraparound is a bit different in newer processor with more address lines but that will be explained in later chapters.

2.8.	ADDRESSING MODES SUMMARY 
 The iAPX88 processor supports seven modes of memory access. Remember  that immediate is not an addressing mode but an operand type. Operands  can be immediate, register, or memory. If the operand is memory one of the  seven addressing modes will be used to access it. The memory access  mechanisms can also be written in the general form “base + index + offset” and we can define the possible addressing modes by saying that any one, two, or none can be skipped from the general form to form a legal memory access.
There are a few common mistakes done in forming a valid memory access. Part of a register cannot be used to access memory. Like BX is allowed to hold an address but BL or BH are not. Address is 16bit and must be contained in a 16bit register. BX-SI is not possible. The only thing that we can do is addition of a base register with an index register. Any other operation is disallowed. BS+BP and SI+DI are both disallowed as we cannot have two base or two index registers in one memory access. One has to be a base register and the other has to be an index register and that is the reason of naming them differently.

Direct 
A fixed offset is given in brackets and the memory at that offset is accessed. For example “mov [1234], ax” stores the contents of the AX registers in two bytes starting at address 1234 in the current data segment. The instruction “mov [1234], al” stores the contents of the AL register in the byte at offset 1234.

Based Register Indirect 
A base register is used in brackets and the actual address accessed depends on the value contained in that register. For example “mov [bx], ax”  moves the two byte contents of the AX register to the address contained in  the BX register in the current data segment. The instruction “mov [bp], al”  moves the one byte content of the AL register to the address contained in the BP register in the current stack segment.

Indexed Register Indirect 
An index register is used in brackets and the actual address accessed depends on the value contained in that register. For example “mov [si], ax” moves the contents of the AX register to the word starting at address contained in SI in the current data segment. The instruction “mov [di], ax” moves the word contained in AX to the offset stored in DI in the current data segment.

Based Register Indirect + Offset 
A base register is used with a constant offset in this addressing mode. The value contained in the base register is added with the constant offset to get the effective address. For example  “mov [bx+300], ax”  stores the word contained in AX at the offset attained by adding 300 to BX in the current data segment. The instruction “mov [bp+300], ax” stores the word in AX to the offset attained by adding 300 to BP in the current stack segment.
 

Indexed Register Indirect + Offset
An index register is used with a constant offset in this addressing mode. The value contained in the index register is added with the constant offset to get the effective address. For example “mov [si+300], ax” moves the word contained in AX to the offset attained by adding 300 to SI in the current data segment and the instruction “mov [di+300], al” moves the byte contained in AL to the offset attained by adding 300 to DI in the current data segment.

Base + Index
One base and one index register is used in this addressing mode. The value of the base register and the index register are added together to get the effective address. For example “mov [bx+si], ax” moves the word contained in the AX register to offset attained by adding BX and SI in the current data segment. The instruction “mov [bp+di], al” moves the byte contained in AL to the offset attained by adding BP and DI in the current stack segment. Observe that the default segment is based on the base register and not on the index register. This is why base registers and index registers are named separately. Other examples are “mov [bx+di], ax” and “mov [bp+si], ax.” This method can be used to access a two dimensional array such that one dimension is in a base register and the other is in an index register.

Base + Index + Offset 
This is the most complex addressing method and is relatively infrequently used. A base register, an index register, and a constant offset are all used in this addressing mode. The values of the base register, the index register, and the constant offset are all added together to get the effective address. For example “mov [bx+si+300], ax” moves the word contents of the AX register to the word in memory starting at offset attained by adding BX, SI, and 300 in the current data segment. Default segment association is again based on the base register. It might be used with the array base of a two dimensional array as the constant offset, one dimension in the base register and the other in the index register. This way all calculation of location of the desired element has been delegated to the processor.

EXERCISES
1.	What is a label and how does the assembler differentiates between code labels and data labels?
2.	List the seven addressing modes available in the 8088 architecture.
3.	Differentiate between effective address and physical address.
4.	What is the effective address generated by the following instructions? Every instruction is independent of others. Initially BX=0x0100, num1=0x1001, [num1]=0x0000, and SI=0x0100
a.	mov ax, [bx+12]
b.	mov ax, [bx+num1]
c.	mov ax, [num1+bx]
d.	mov ax, [bx+si]
5.	What is the effective address generated by the following combinations if they are valid. If not give reason. Initially BX=0x0100, SI=0x0010, DI=0x0001, BP=0x0200, and SP=0xFFFF
a.	bx-si
b.	bx-bp
c.	bx+10
d.	bx-10
e.	bx+sp
f.	bx+di
6.	Identify the problems in the following instructions and correct them by replacing them with one or two instruction having the same effect.
 

a.	mov [02], [ 22]
b.	mov [wordvar], 20
c.	mov bx, al
d.	mov ax, [si+di+100]
7.	What is the function of segment override prefix and what changes it brings to the opcode?
8.	What are the two types of address wraparound? What physical address is accessed with [BX+SI] if FFFF is loaded in BX, SI, and DS.
9.	Write instructions to do the following.
a.	Copy contents of memory location with offset 0025 in the current data segment into AX.
b.	Copy AX into memory location with offset 0FFF in the current data segment.
c.	Move contents of memory location with offset 0010 to memory location with offset 002F in the current data segment.
10.	Write a program to calculate the square of 20 by using a loop that adds 20 to the accumulator 20 times.
 

 
3 
Branching

3.1.	COMPARISON AND CONDITIONS 
Conditional jump was introduced in the last chapter to loop for the addition of a fixed number of array elements. The jump was based on the zero flag. There are many other conditions possible in a program. For example an operand can be greater than another operand or it can be smaller. We use comparisons and boolean expressions extensively in higher level languages. They must be available is some form in assembly language, otherwise they could not possibly be made available in a higher level language. In fact they are available in a very fine and purified form.
The basic root instruction for all comparisons is CMP standing for  compare. The operation of CMP is to subtract the source operand from the destination operand, updating the flags without changing either the source or the destination. CMP is one of the key instructions as it introduces the capability of conditional routing in the processor.
A closer thought reveals that with subtraction we can check many different conditions. For example if a larger number is subtracted from a smaller number then borrow is needed. The carry flag plays the role of borrow during the subtraction operation. And in this condition the carry flag will be set. If two equal numbers are subtracted the answer is zero and the zero flag will be set. Every significant relation between the destination and source is evident from the sign flag, carry flag, zero flag, and the overflow flag. CMP is meaningless without a conditional jump immediately following it.
Another important distinction at this point is the difference between signed  and unsigned numbers. In unsigned numbers only the magnitude of the number is important, whereas in signed numbers both the magnitude and the sign are important. For example -2 is greater than -3 but 2 is smaller than 3. The sign has affected our comparisons.
  Inside the computer signed numbers are represented in two’s complement  notation. In essence a number in this representation is still a number, just  that now our interpretation of this number will be signed. Whether we use jump above and below or we use jump greater or less will convey our intention to the processor. The jump above and greater operations at first sight seem to be doing the same operation, and similarly below and less operations seem to be similar. However for signed numbers JG and JL will work properly and for unsigned JA and JB will work properly and not the other way around.
It is important to note that at the time of comparison, the intent of the programmer to treat the numbers as signed or unsigned is not clear. The subtraction in CMP is a normal subtraction. It is only after the comparison, during the conditional jump operation, that the intent is conveyed. At that time with a specific combination of flags checked the intent is satisfied.
For example a number 2 is represented in a word as 0002 while the number -2 is represented as FFFE. In a byte they would be represented as 02 and FE. Now both have the same magnitude however the different sign has caused very different representation in two’s complement form. Now if the intent is to use FFFE or decimal 65534 then the same data would be placed in the word as in case of -2. In fact if -2 and 65534 are compared the processor will set the zero flag signaling that they are exactly equal. As regards an unsigned comparison the number 65534 is much greater than 2.
 

So if a JA is taken after comparing -2 in the destination with 2 in the source the jump will be taken. If however JG is used after the same comparison the jump will not be taken as it will consider the sign and with the sign -2 is smaller than 2. The key idea is that -2 and 65534 were both stored in memory in the same form. It was the interpretation that treated it as a signed or as an unsigned number.
The unsigned comparisons see the numbers as 0 being the smallest and 65535 being the largest with the order that 0 < 1 < 2 … < 65535. The signed comparisons see the number -32768 which has the same memory representation as 32768 as the smallest number and 32767 as the largest with the order -32768 < -32767  < … < -1 < 0 < 1 < 2 < … < 32767. All the negative numbers have the same representation as an unsigned number in the range 32768 … 65535 however the signed interpretation of the signed comparisons makes them be treated as negative numbers smaller than zero.
All meaningful situations both for signed and unsigned numbers that occur after a comparison are detailed in the following table.

DEST = SRC	 ZF = 1 
When the source is subtracted from the destination and both are equal the result is zero and therefore the zero flag is set. This works for both signed and unsigned numbers.
UDEST < USRC	CF = 1	When an unsigned source is subtracted from an unsigned destination and the destination is smaller, borrow is needed which sets the carry flag.
UDEST  USRC	ZF = 1 OR CF = 1 	If the zero flag is set, it means that the source and destination are equal and if the carry flag is set it means a borrow was needed in the subtraction and therefore the destination is smaller.
UDEST  USRC	 CF = 0		When an unsigned source	is  subtracted	from	an	unsigned destination no borrow will be needed either when the operands are equal or when the destination is greater than the source.
UDEST > USRC	ZF = 0 AND CF = 0	The unsigned source and destination are not equal if the zero flag is not set and the destination is not smaller since no borrow was taken. Therefore the destination is greater than the source.
SDEST < SSRC	SF  OF		When a signed source is subtracted from a signed destination and the answer is negative with no overflow than the destination is smaller than the source. If however there is an overflow meaning that the sign has changed unexpectedly, the meanings  are  reversed  and  a
 

		positive number signals that the destination is smaller.
SDEST  SSRC	ZF = 1 OR SF  OF	If the zero flag is set, it means that the source and destination are equal and if the sign and overflow flags differ it means that the destination is smaller as described above.
SDEST  SSRC	SF = OF	When a signed source is subtracted from a signed destination and the answer is positive with no overflow than the destination is greater than the source. When an overflow is there signaling that sign has changed unexpectedly, we interpret a negative answer as the signal that the destination is greater.
SDEST > SSRC	ZF = 0 AND SF = OF	If the zero flag is not set, it means that the signed operands are not equal and if the sign and overflow match in addition to this it means that the destination is greater than the source.

3.2.	CONDITIONAL JUMPS
For every interesting or meaningful situation of flags, a conditional jump is there. For example JZ and JNZ check the zero flag. If in a comparison both  operands are same, the result of subtraction will be zero and the zero flag  will be set. Thus JZ and JNZ can be used to test equality. That is why there are renamed versions JE and JNE read as jump if equal or jump if not equal. They seem more logical in writing but mean exactly the same thing with the same opcode. Many jumps are renamed with two or three names for the same jump, so that the appropriate logic can be conveyed in assembly language programs. This renaming is done by Intel and is a standard for iAPX88. JC and JNC test the carry flag. For example we may need to test whether there was an overflow in the last unsigned addition or subtraction. Carry flag will also be set if two unsigned numbers are subtracted and the first is smaller than the second. Therefore the renamed versions JB, JNAE, and JNB, JAE are there standing for jump if below, jump if not above or equal, jump if not below, and jump if above or equal respectively. The operation of all jumps can be seen from the following table.

JC JB JNAE	Jump if carry  Jump if below 
Jump if not above or equal 	CF = 1	This jump is taken if the		last		arithmetic operation generated a carry or required a borrow. After a CMP it is	taken			if	 the unsigned destination is smaller	than	the unsigned source.
JNC JNB JAE	Jump if not carry Jump if not below Jump if above or equal	CF = 0		This jump is taken if  the	last	arithmetic operation		did	not
 

			generated a carry or required a borrow. After a CMP it is taken if the unsigned destination
is larger or equal to the unsigned source.
JE JZ	Jump if equal Jump if zero	ZF = 1	This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation produced a zero in its destination. After a CMP it is taken if both operands were equal.
JNE JNZ	Jump if not equal Jump if not zero	ZF = 0	This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation did not produce a zero in its destination. After a CMP it is taken if both operands	were different.
JA JNBE	Jump if above
Jump if not below or equal	ZF = 0 AND CF = 0	This jump is taken after a CMP if the unsigned destination is larger	than	the unsigned source.
JNA JBE	Jump if not above Jump if below or equal	ZF = 1 OR CF = 1	This jump is taken after a CMP if the unsigned destination is smaller than or equal to	the	unsigned source.
JL JNGE	Jump if less
Jump if not greater or equal	SF  OF	This jump is taken after a CMP if the signed destination is smaller	than	the signed source.
JNL JGE	Jump if not less
Jump if greater or equal	SF = OF	This jump is taken after a CMP if the signed destination is larger than or equal to the signed source.
JG JNLE	Jump if greater
Jump if not less or equal	ZF = 0 AND SF = OF	This jump is taken after a CMP if the signed destination is larger than the signed source.
JNG JLE	Jump if not greater Jump if less or equal	ZF = 1 OR SF  OF	This jump is taken after a CMP if the signed destination is smaller than or equal to	the	signed source.
 

JO	Jump if overflow. 	OF = 1	This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation changed the sign unexpectedly.
JNO	Jump if not overflow	OF = 0	This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation did not change the sign unexpectedly.
JS	Jump if sign	 	SF = 1 	This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation produced a negative number in its destination.
JNS	Jump if not sign	SF = 0	This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation produced a positive number in its destination.
JP JPE	Jump if parity Jump if even parity	PF = 1
This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation produced a number	in	its destination that has even parity.
JNP JPO	Jump if not parity Jump if odd parity	PF = 0	This jump is taken if the last arithmetic operation produced a number	in	its destination that has odd parity.
JCXZ	Jump if CX is zero	 	CX = 0 	This jump is taken if the CX register is zero.

The CMP instruction sets the flags reflecting the relation of the destination
 
The JA and JB instructions are related to unsigned numbers. That is our interpretation for the destination and source operands is unsigned. The 16th bit holds data and not the sign. In the JL and JG instructions standing for jump if lower and jump if greater respectively, the interpretation is signed. The 16th bit holds the sign and not the data. The difference between them will be made clear as an elaborate example will be given to explain the difference.
One jump is special that it is not dependant on any flag. It is JCXZ, jump if the CX register is zero. This is because of the special treatment of the CX register as a counter. This jump is regardless of the zero flag. There is no counterpart or not form of this instruction.
The adding numbers example of the last chapter can be a little simplified using the compare instruction on the BX register and eliminating the need for a separate counter as below.
 

Example 3.1
001	; a program to add ten numbers without a separate counter

002	[org 0x0100]
003	mov bx, 0	; initialize array index to zero
004	mov ax, 0	; initialize sum to zero
005	
006	l1:	add ax, [num1+bx]	; add number to ax
007	add bx, 2	; advance bx to next index
008	cmp bx, 20	; are we beyond the last index
009	jne l1	; if not add next number
010	
011	mov [total], ax	; write back sum in memory
012	
013	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
014	int 0x21
015	
016	num1:	dw	10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50
017	total:	dw	0
006	The format of memory access is still base + offset.
008	BX is used as the array index as well as the counter. The offset of
	11th number will be 20, so as soon as BX becomes 20 just after the
	10th number has been added, the addition is stopped.
009	The jump is displayed as JNZ in the debugger even though we have
	written JNE in our example. This is because it is a renamed jump
	with the same opcode as JNZ and the debugger has no way of
	knowing the mnemonic that we used after looking just at the
	opcode. Also every code and data reference that we used till now is
	seen in the opcode as well. However for the jump instruction we see
	an operand of F2 in the opcode and not 0116. This will be discussed
	in detail with unconditional jumps. It is actually a short relative
	jump and the operand is stored in the form of positive or negative
	offset from this instruction.

With conditional branching in hand, there are just a few small things left in assembly language that fills some gaps. Now there is just imagination and the skill to conceive programs that can make you write any program.

3.3.	UNCONDITIONAL JUMP 
Till now we have been placing data at the end of code. There is no such restriction and we can define data anywhere in the code. Taking the previous example, if we place data at the start of code instead of at the end and we load our program in the debugger. We can see our data placed at the start but the debugger is intending to start execution at our data. The COM file definition said that the first executable instruction is at offset 0100 but we have placed data there instead of code. So the debugger will try to interpret that data as code and showed whatever it could make up out of those opcodes.
We introduce a new instruction called JMP. It is the unconditional jump that executes regardless of the state of all flags. So we write an unconditional jump as the very first instruction of our program and jump to the next instruction that follows our data declarations. This time 0100 contains a valid first instruction of our program.

Example 3.2
001	; a program to add ten numbers without a separate counter
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start	; unconditionally jump over data
004	
005	num1:	dw	10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50
006	total:	dw	0
 

007					
008	start:	mov	bx, 0	;	initialize array index to zero
009		mov	ax, 0	;	initialize sum to zero
010					
011	l1:	add	ax, [num1+bx]	;	add number to ax
012		add	bx, 2	;	advance bx to next index
013		cmp	bx, 20	;	are we beyond the last index
014		jne	l1	;	if not add next number
015					
016		mov	[total], ax	;	write back sum in memory
017					
018		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
019		int	0x21		
003	JMP jumps over the data declarations to the start label and execution resumes from there.


3.4.	RELATIVE ADDRESSING
Inside the debugger the instruction is shown as JMP 0119 and the location 0119 contains the original first instruction of the logic of our program. This jump is unconditional, it will always be taken. Now looking at the opcode we see F21600 where F2 is the opcode and 1600 is the operand to it. 1600 is 0016 in proper word order. 0119 is not given as a parameter rather 0016 is given.
 This is position relative addressing in contrast to absolute addressing. It is  not telling the exact address rather it is telling how much forward or  backward to go from the current position of IP in the current code segment.  So the instruction means to add 0016 to the IP register. At the time of execution of the first instruction at 0100 IP was pointing to the next instruction at 0103, so after adding 16 it became 0119, the desired target location. The mechanism is important to know, however all calculations in this mechanism are done by the assembler and by the processor. We just use a label with the JMP instruction and are ensured that the instruction at the target label will be the one to be executed.

3.5.	TYPES OF JUMP 
The three types of jump, near, short, and far, differ in the size of instruction and the range of memory they can jump to with the smallest short form of two bytes and a range of just 256 bytes to the far form of five bytes and a range covering the whole memory.

Short Jump


Near Jump

E9	Disp Low	Disp High

Far Jump

EA	IP Low	IP High	CS Low	CS High

Near Jump
When the relative address stored with the instruction is in 16 bits as in the last example the jump is called a near jump. Using a near jump we can jump anywhere within a segment. If we add a large number it will wrap around to
 

the lower part. A negative number actually is a large number and works this way using the wraparound behavior.

Short Jump 
 If the offset is stored in a single byte as in 75F2 with the opcode 75 and  operand F2, the jump is called a short jump. F2 is added to IP as a signed  byte. If the byte is negative the complement is negated from IP otherwise the byte is added. Unconditional jumps can be short, near, and far. The far type is yet to be discussed. Conditional jumps can only be short. A short jump can go +127 bytes ahead in code and -128 bytes backwards and no more. This is the limitation of a byte in singed representation.

Far Jump 
Far jump is not position relative but is absolute.  Both segment and offset must be given to a far jump. The previous two jumps were used to jump within a segment. Sometimes we may need to go from one code segment to another, and near and short jumps cannot take us there. Far jump must be used and a two byte segment and a two byte offset are given to it. It loads CS with the segment part and IP with the offset part. Execution therefore resumes from that location in physical memory. The three instructions that have a far form are JMP, CALL, and RET, are related to program control. Far capability makes intra segment control possible.

3.6.	SORTING EXAMPLE 
Moving ahead from our example of adding numbers we progress to a program that can sort a list of numbers using the tools that we have accumulated till now. Sorting can be ascending or descending like if the largest number comes at the top, followed by a smaller number and so on till the smallest number the sort will be called descending. The other order starting with the smallest number and ending at the largest is called ascending sort. This is a common problem and many algorithms have been developed to solve it. One simple algorithm is the bubble sort algorithm.
In this algorithm we compare consecutive numbers. If they are in required order e.g. if it is a descending sort and the first is larger then the second, then we leave them as it is and if they are not in order, we swap them. Then we do the same process for the next two numbers and so on till the last two are compared and possibly swapped.
A complete iteration is called a pass over the array. We need N passes at least in the simplest algorithm if N is the number of elements to be sorted. A finer algorithm is to check if any swap was done in this pass and stop as soon as a pass goes without a swap. The array is now sorted as every pair of elements is in order.
For example if our list of numbers is 60, 55, 45, and 58 and we want to sort them in ascending order, the first comparison will be of 60 and 55 and as the order will be reversed to 55 and 60. The next comparison will be of 60 and 45 and again the two will be swapped. The next comparison of 60 and 58 will also cause a swap. At the end of first pass the numbers will be in order of 55, 45, 58, and 60. Observe that the largest number has bubbled down to the bottom. Just like a bubble at bottom of water. In the next pass 55 and 45 will be swapped. 55 and 58 will not be swapped and 58 and 60 will also not be swapped. In the next pass there will be no swap as the elements are in order i.e. 45, 55, 58, and 60. The passes will be stopped as the last pass did not cause any swap. The application of bubble sort on these numbers is further explained with the following illustration.
 

State of Data	Swap Done	Swap Flag

 
Pass 1

60	55	45	58

55	60	45	58

55	45	60	58

Pass 2

55	45	58	60

45	55	58	60

45	55	58	60

Pass 3

45	55	58	60

45	55	58	60
 
Off

Yes	On

Yes	On

Yes	On

Off

Yes	On

No	On

No	On

Off

No	Off

No	Off

No	Off
 

No more passes since swap flag is Off


Example 3.3
001	; sorting a list of ten numbers using bubble sort
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	data:	dw	60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0
006	swap:	db	0
007	
008	start:	mov bx, 0	; initialize array index to zero
009	mov byte [swap], 0	; rest swap flag to no swaps
010	
011	loop1:	mov ax, [data+bx]	; load number in ax
012	cmp ax, [data+bx+2]	; compare with next number
013	jbe noswap	; no swap if already in order
014	
015	mov dx, [data+bx+2]	; load second element in dx
016	mov [data+bx+2], ax	; store first number in second
017	mov [data+bx], dx	; store second number in first
018	mov byte [swap], 1	; flag that a swap has been done
019	
020	noswap:	add bx, 2	; advance bx to next index
021	cmp bx, 18	; are we at last index
022	jne loop1	; if not compare next two
023	
024	cmp byte [swap], 1	; check if a swap has been done
025	je	start	; if yes make another pass
026	
027	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
028	int 0x21
 

003	The jump instruction is placed to skip over data.
006	The swap flag can be stored in a register but as an example it is stored in memory and also to extend the concept at a later stage.
011-012	One element is read in AX and it is compared with the next element because memory to memory comparisons are not allowed.
013	If the JBE is changed to JB, not only the unnecessary swap on equal will be performed, there will be a major algorithmic flaw due to a logical error as in the case of equal elements the algorithm will never
stop. JBE won’t swap in the case of equal elements.
015-017	The swap is done using DX and AX registers in such a way that the values are crossed. The code uses the information that one of the
elements is already in the AX register.
021	This time BX is compared with 18 instead of 20 even though the number of elements is same. This is because we pick an element and compare it with the next element. When we pick the 9th element we compare it with the next element and this is the last comparison,
since if we pick the 10th element we will compare it with the 11th element and there is no 11th element in our case.
024-025	If a swap is done we repeat the whole process for possible more swaps.

Inside the debugger we observe that the JBE is changed to JNA due to the same reason as discussed for JNE and JNZ. The passes change the data in the same manner as we presented in our illustration above. If JBE in the code is changed to JAE the sort will change from ascending to descending. For signed numbers we can use JLE and JGE respectively for ascending and descending sort.
To clarify the difference of signed and unsigned jumps we change the data array in the last program to include some negative numbers as well. When JBE will be used on this data, i.e. with unsigned interpretation of the data and an ascending sort, the negative numbers will come at the end after the largest positive number. However JLE will bring the negative numbers at the very start of the list to bring them in proper ascending order according to a signed interpretation, even though they are large in magnitude. The data used is shown as below.
data:	dw 60, 55, 45, 50, -40, -35, 25, 30, 10, 0
This data includes some signed numbers as well. The JBE instruction will treat this data as an unsigned number and will cater only for the magnitude ignoring the sign. If the program is loaded in the debugger, the numbers will appear in their hexadecimal equivalent. The two numbers -40 and -35 are especially important as they are represented as FFD8 and FFDD. This data is not telling whether it is signed or unsigned. Our interpretation will decide whether it is a very large unsigned number or a signed number in two’s complement form.
If the sorting algorithm is applied on the above data with JBE as the comparison instruction to sort in ascending order with unsigned interpretation, observe the comparisons of the two numbers FFD8 and FFDD. For example it will decide that FFDD > FFD8 since the first is larger in magnitude. At the end of sorting FFDD will be at the end of the list being declared the largest number and FFD8 will precede it to be the second largest.
If however the comparison instruction is changed to JLE and sorting is done on the same data it works similarly except on the two numbers FFDD and FFD8. This time JLE declares them to be smaller than every other number and also declares FFDD < FFD8. At the end of sorting, FFDD is
 

declared to be the smallest number followed by FFD8 and then 0000. This is in contrast to the last example where JBE was used. This happened because JLE interpreted our data as signed numbers, and as a signed number FFDD has its sign bit on signaling that it is a negative number in two’s complement form which is smaller than 0000 and every positive number. However JBE did not give any significance to the sign bit and included it in the magnitude. Therefore it declared the negative numbers to be the largest numbers.
If the required interpretation was of signed numbers the result produced by JLE is correct and if the required interpretation was of unsigned numbers the result produced by JBE is correct. This is the very difference between signed and unsigned integers in higher level languages, where the compiler takes the responsibility of making the appropriate jump depending on the type of integer used. But it is only at this level that we can understand the actual mechanism going on. In assembly language, use of proper jump is the responsibility of the programmer, to convey the intentions to use the data as signed or as unsigned.
The remaining possibilities of signed descending sort and unsigned descending sort can be done on the same lines and are left as an exercise. Other conditional jumps work in the same manner and can be studied from the reference at the end. Several will be discussed in more detail when they are used in subsequent chapters.

EXERCISES
1.	Which registers are changed by the CMP instruction?
2.	What are the different types of jumps available? Describe position relative addressing.
3.	If AX=8FFF and BX=0FFF and “cmp ax, bx” is executed, which of the following jumps will be taken? Each part is independent of others. Also give the value of Z, S, and C flags.
a.	jg greater
b.	jl smaller
c.	ja above
d.	jb below
4.	Write a program to find the maximum number and the minimum number from an array of ten numbers.
5.	Write a program to search a particular element from an array using binary search. If the element is found set AX to one and otherwise to zero.
6.	Write a program to calculate the factorial of a number where factorial is defined as:
factorial(x) = x*(x-1)*(x-2)*...*1 factorial(0) = 1
 

 
4
Bit Manipulations

4.1.	MULTIPLICATION ALGORITHM 
With the important capability of decision making in our repertoire we move on to the discussion of an algorithm, which will help us uncover an important set of instructions in our processor used for bit manipulations.
Multiplication is a common process that we use, and we were trained to do in early schooling. Remember multiplying by a digit and then putting a cross  and then multiplying with the next digit and putting two crosses and so on and summing the intermediate results in the end. Very familiar process but we never saw the process as an algorithm, and we need to see it as an  algorithm to convey it to the processor. 
To highlight the important thing in the algorithm we revise it on two 4bit binary numbers. The numbers are 1101 i.e. 13 and 0101 i.e. 5. The answer should be 65 or in binary 01000001. Observe that the answer is twice as long as the multiplier and the multiplicand. The multiplication is shown in the following figure.

1101 = 13
0101 = 5

1101
0000x
1101xx 0000xxx

01000001 = 65

We take the first digit of the multiplier  and multiply it with the multiplicand. As the digit is one the answer is the multiplicand itself. So we  place the multiplicand below the bar. Before multiplying with the next digit a  cross is placed at the right most place on the next line and the result is  placed shifted one digit left. However since the digit is zero, the result is zero.  Next digit is one, multiplying with which, the answer is 1101. We put two crosses on the next line at the right most positions and place the result there shifted two places to the left. The fourth digit is zero, so the answer 0000 is placed with three crosses to its right.
Observe the beauty of binary base, as no real multiplication is needed at the digit level. If the digit is 0 the answer is 0 and if the digit is 1 the answer is the multiplicand itself. Also observe that for every next digit in the multiplier the answer is written shifted one more place to the left. No shifting for the first digit, once for the second, twice for the third and thrice for the fourth one. Adding all the intermediate answers the result is 01000001=65 as desired. Crosses are treated as zero in this addition.
Before formulating the algorithm for this problem, we need some more instructions that can shift a number so that we use this instruction for our multiplicand shifting and also some way to check the bits of the multiplier one by one.

4.2.	SHIFTING AND ROTATIONS 
 The set of shifting and rotation instructions is one of the most useful set in  any processor’s instruction set. They simplify really complex tasks to a very 
 

neat and concise algorithm. The following shifting and rotation operations are available in our processor.

Shift Logical Right (SHR) 
 The shift logical right operation inserts a zero from the left and moves  every bit one position to the right and copies the rightmost bit in the carry  flag. Imagine that there is a pipe filled to capacity with eight balls. The pipe is  open from both ends and there is a basket at the right end to hold anything dropping from there. The operation of shift logical right is to force a white ball from the left end. The operation is depicted in the following illustration.

1	0	1	1	0	1	0	0
White balls represent zero bits while black balls represent one bits. Sixteen bit shifting is done the same way with a pipe of double capacity.

Shift Logical Left (SHL) / Shift Arithmetic Left (SAL)
The shift logical left operation is the exact opposite of shift logical right. In this operation the zero bit is inserted from the right and every bit moves one position to its left with the most significant bit dropping into the carry flag. Shift arithmetic left is just another name for shift logical left. The operation is again exemplified with the following illustration of ball and pipes.

1	0	1	1	0	1	0	0

Shift Arithmetic Right (SAR)
A signed number holds the sign in its most significant bit. If this bit was one a logical right shifting will change the sign of this number because of insertion of a zero from the left. The sign of a signed number should not change because of shifting.
The operation of shift arithmetic right is therefore to  shift every bit one place to the right with a copy of the most significant bit left at the most  significant place. The bit dropped from the right is caught in the carry  basket. The sign bit is retained in this operation. The operation is further illustrated below.

	
	1
0	1	1	0	1	0	0
The left shifting operation is basically multiplication by 2 while the right shifting operation is division by two. However for signed numbers division by two can be accomplished by using shift arithmetic right and not shift logical right. The left shift operation is equivalent to multiplication except when an important bit is dropped from the left. The overflow flag will signal this condition if it occurs and can be checked with JO. For division by 2 of a signed number logical right shifting will give a wrong answer for a negative number as the zero inserted from the left will change its sign. To retain the sign flag and still effectively divide by two the shift arithmetic right instruction must be used on signed numbers.
 

Rotate Right (ROR) 
  In the rotate right operation every bit moves one position to the right and  the bit dropped from the right is inserted at the left. This bit is also copied  into the carry flag. The operation can be understood by imagining that the pipe used for shifting has been molded such that both ends coincide. Now when the first ball is forced to move forward, every ball moves one step forward with the last ball entering the pipe from its other end occupying the first ball’s old position. The carry basket takes a snapshot of this ball leaving one end of the pipe and entering from the other.

	
	1
0	1	1	0	1	0	0

Rotate Left (ROL) 
In the operation of rotate left instruction, the most significant bit is copied to the carry flag and is inserted from the right, causing every bit to move one position to the left. It is the reverse of the rotate right instruction. Rotation can be of eight or sixteen bits. The following illustration will make the concept clear using the same pipe and balls example.

	
1	0	1	1	0	1	0	0

								

Rotate Through Carry Right (RCR) 
In the rotate through carry right instruction, the carry flag is inserted from the left, every bit moves one position to the right, and the right most bit is dropped in the carry flag. Effectively this is a nine bit or a seventeen bit rotation instead of the eight or sixteen bit rotation as in the case of simple rotations.
Imagine the circular molded pipe as used in the simple rotations but this time the carry position is part of the circle between the two ends of the pipe. Pushing the carry ball from the left causes every ball to move one step to its right and the right most bit occupying the carry place. The idea is further illustrated below.



1	0	1	1	0	1	0	0

Rotate Through Carry Left (RCL)
The exact opposite of rotate through carry right instruction is the rotate through carry left instruction. In its operation the carry flag is inserted from the right causing every bit to move one location to its left and the most significant bit occupying the carry flag. The concept is illustrated below in the same manner as in the last example.

	
C
	1	0	1	1	0	1	0	0

										
 

4.3.	MULTIPLICATION IN ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 
In the multiplication algorithm discussed above we revised the way we multiplied number in lower classes, and gave an example of that method on binary numbers. We make a simple modification to the traditional algorithm before we proceed to formulate it in assembly language.
In the traditional algorithm we calculate all intermediate answers and then sum them to get the final answer. If we add every intermediate answer to accumulate the result, the result will be same in the end, except that we do not have to remember a lot of intermediate answers during the whole multiplication. The multiplication with the new algorithm is shown below.

1101 = 13	Accumulated Result
0101 = 5
-----		0 (Initial Value) 1101 = 13	0 + 13 = 13
0000x = 0	13 + 0 = 13
1101xx = 52	13 + 52 = 65
0000xxx = 0	65 + 0 = 65 (Answer)

We try to identify steps of our algorithm. First we set the result to zero. Then we check the right most bit of multiplier. If it is one add the multiplicand to the result, and if it is zero perform no addition. Left shift the multiplicand before the next bit of multiplier is tested. The left shifting of the multiplicand is performed regardless of the value of the multiplier’s right most bit. Just like the crosses in traditional multiplication are always placed to mark the ones, tens, thousands, etc. places. Then check the next bit and if it is one add the shifted value of the multiplicand to the result. Repeat for as many digits as there are in the multiplier, 4 in our example. Formulating the steps of the algorithm we get:
•	Shift the multiplier to the right.
•	If CF=1 add the multiplicand to the result.
•	Shift the multiplicand to the left.
•	Repeat the algorithm 4 times.
 
drop in the carry flag. If we test the carry flag using JC we are effectively testing the right most bit of the multiplier. Another shifting will cause the next bit to drop in the next iteration and so on. So our task of checking bits one by one is satisfied using the shift operation. There are many other methods to do this bit testing as well, however we exemplify one of the methods in this example.
In the first iteration there is no shifting just like there is no cross in traditional multiplication in the first pass. Therefore we placed the left shifting of the multiplicand after the addition step. However the right shifting of multiplier must be before the addition as the addition step’s execution depends upon its result.
We introduce an assembly language program to perform this 4bit multiplication. The algorithm is extensible to more bits but there are a few complications, which are left to be discussed later. For now we do a 4bit multiplication to keep the algorithm simple.

Example 4.1
01	; 4bit multiplication algorithm	
02	[org 0x100]	
03	jmp start	
04		
05	multiplicand: db	13	; 4bit multiplicand (8bit space)
06	multiplier:	db	5	; 4bit multiplier
 

07	result:	db	0	;	8bit result
08				
09	start:	mov	cl, 4	;	initialize bit count to four
10		mov	bl, [multiplicand] ;	load multiplicand in bl
11		mov	dl, [multiplier]	;	load multiplier in dl
12				
13	checkbit:	shr	dl, 1	;	move right most bit in carry
14		jnc	skip	;	skip addition if bit is zero
15				
16		add	[result], bl	;	accumulate result
17				
18	skip:	shl	bl, 1	;	shift multiplicand left
19		dec	cl	;	decrement bit count
20		jnz	checkbit	;	repeat if bits left
21				
22		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
23		int	0x21	
04-06	The  numbers  to  be  multiplied  are  constants  for  now.  The
	multiplication is four bit so the answer is stored in an 8bit register.
07	If the operands were 8bit the answer would be 16bit and if the operands were 16bit the answer would be 32bit. Since eight bits can
	fit in a byte we have used 4bit multiplication as our first example.
14-16	Since addition by zero means nothing we skip the addition step if the rightmost bit of the multiplier is zero. If the jump is not taken
	the shifted value of the multiplicand is added to the result.
18	The multiplicand is left shifted in every iteration regardless of the multiplier bit.
19	DEC is a new instruction but its operation should be immediately understandable with the knowledge gained till now. It simply
	subtracts one from its single operand.

20	The JNZ instruction causes the algorithm to repeat till any bits of the multiplier are left

 Inside the debugger observe the working of the SHR and SHL instructions.  The SHR instruction is effectively dividing its operand by two and the  remainder is stored in the carry flag from where we test it. The SHL  instruction is multiplying its operand by two so that it is added at one place more towards the left in the result.

4.4.	EXTENDED OPERATIONS
We performed a 4bit multiplication to explain the algorithm however the real advantage of the computer is when we ask it to multiply large numbers, Numbers whose multiplication takes real time. If we have an 8bit number we  can do the multiplication in word registers, but are we limited to word  operations? What if we want to multiply 32bit or even larger numbers?  We are certainly not limited. Assembly language only provides us the basic building blocks. We build a plaza out of these blocks, or a building, or a classic piece of architecture is only dependant upon our imagination. With our logic we can extend these algorithms as much as we want.
Our next example will be multiplication of 16bit numbers to produce a 32bit answer. However for a 32bit answer we need a way to shift a 32bit number and a way to add 32bit numbers. We cannot depend on 16bit shifting as we have 16 significant bits in our multiplicand and shifting any bit towards the left may drop a valuable bit causing a totally wrong result. A valuable bit means any bit that is one. Dropping a zero bit doesn’t cause any difference. So we place the 16it number in 32bit space with the upper 16 bits zeroed so that the sixteen shift operations don’t cause any valuable bit to drop. Even though the numbers were 16bit we need 32bit operations to multiply correctly.
To clarify this necessity, we take example of a number 40000 or 9C40 in hexadecimal. In binary it is represented as 1001110001000000. To multiply
 

by two we shift it one place to the left. The answer we get is 0011100010000000 and the left most one is dropped in the carry flag. The answer should be the 17bit number 0x13880 but it is 0x3880, which are 14464 in decimal instead of the expected 80000. We should be careful of this situation whenever shifting is used.

Extended Shifting 
Using our basic shifting and rotation instructions we can effectively shift a 32bit number in memory word by word. We cannot shift the whole number at once since our architecture is limited to word operations. The algorithm we use consists of just two instructions and we name it extended shifting.
num1:	dd	40000
shl word [num1], 1 rcl word [num1+2], 1
The DD directive reserves a 32bit space in memory, however the value we placed there will fit in 16bits. So we can safely shift the number left 16 times. The least significant word is accessible at num1 and the most significant word is accessible at num1+2.
The two instructions are carefully crafted such that the first one shifts the lower word towards the left and the most significant bit of that word is dropped in carry. With the next instruction we push that dropped bit into the least significant bit of the next word effectively joining the two 16bit words. The final carry after the second instruction will be the most significant bit of the higher word, which for this number will always be zero.
The following illustration will clarify the concept. The pipe on the right contains the lower half and the pipe on the left contains the upper half. The first instruction forced a zero from the right into the lower half and the left most bit is saved in carry, and from there it is pushed into the upper half and the upper half is shifted as well.

Step 1 


 Step 2


For shifting right the exact opposite is done however care must be taken to shift right the upper half first and then rotate through carry right the lower half for obvious reasons. The instructions to do this are.
num1:	dd	40000
shr word [num1+2], 1 rcr word [num1], 1
The same logic has worked. The shift placed the least significant bit of the upper half in the carry flag and it was pushed from right into the lower half. For a singed shift we would have used the shift arithmetic right instruction instead of the shift logical right instruction.
The extension we have done is not limited to 32bits. We can shift a number of any size say 1024 bits. The second instruction will be repeated a number of times and we can achieve the desired effect. Using two simple instructions we have increased the capability of the operation to effectively an unlimited  number of bits. The actual limit is the available memory as even the segment  limit can be catered with a little thought.


multiplication of 16bit numbers. The idea of extension is same here. However we need to introduce a new instruction at this place. The instruction is ADC or “add with carry.” Normal addition has two operands and the second operand is added to the first
 

operand. However ADC has three operands. The third implied operand is the carry flag. The ADC instruction is specifically placed for extending the capability of ADD. Numbers of any size can be added using a proper combination of ADD and ADC. All basic building blocks are provided for the assembly language programmer, and the programmer can extend its capabilities as much as needed by using these fine instructions in appropriate combinations.
Further clarifying the operation of ADC, consider an instruction “ADC AX, BX.” Normal addition would have just added BX to AX, however ADC first adds the carry flag to AX and then adds BX to AX. Therefore the last carry is also included in the result.
The algorithm should be apparent by now. The lower halves of the two numbers to be added are first added with a normal addition. For the upper halves a normal addition would lose track of a possible carry from the lower halves and the answer would be wrong. If a carry was generated it should go to the upper half. Therefore the upper halves are added with an addition with carry instruction.
Since one operand must be in register, ax is used to read the lower and upper halves of the source one by one. The destination is directly updated. The set of instructions goes here.

dest:	dd	40000
src:	dd	80000
	mov add mov adc	ax, [src]
word [dest], ax ax, [src+2]
word [dest+2], ax
To further extend it more addition with carries will be used. However the carry from last addition will be wasted as there will always be a size limit where the results and the numbers are stored. This carry will remain in the carry flag to be tested for a possible overflow.
For subtraction the same logic will be used and just like addition with carry there is an instruction to subtract with borrows called SBB. Borrow in the name means the carry flag and is used just for clarity. Or we can say that the carry flag holds the carry for addition instructions and the borrow for subtraction instructions. Also the carry is generated at the 17th bit and the borrow is also taken from the 17th bit. Also there is no single instruction that needs borrow and carry in their independent meanings at the same time. Therefore it is logical to use the same flag for both tasks.
We extend subtraction with a very similar algorithm. The lower halves must be subtracted normally while the upper halves must be subtracted with a subtract with borrow instruction so that if the lower halves needed a borrow, a one is subtracted from the upper halves. The algorithm is as under.
dest:	dd	40000
src:	dd	80000
mov ax, [src]
sub word [dest], ax mov ax, [src+2]
sbb word [dest+2], ax

Extended Multiplication 
We use extended shifting and extended addition to formulate our algorithm to do extended multiplication. The multiplier is still stored in 16bits since we only need to check its bits one by one. The multiplicand however cannot be stored in 16bits otherwise on left shifting its significant bits might get lost. Therefore it has to be stored in 32bits and the shifting and addition used to accumulate the result must be 32bits as well.

 

01	; 16bit multiplication
02	[org 0x0100]
03	jmp start
04	
05	multiplicand: dd	1300	; 16bit multiplicand 32bit space
06	multiplier:	dw	500	; 16bit multiplier
07	result:	dd	0	; 32bit result
08	
09	start:	mov cl, 16	; initialize bit count to 16
10	mov dx, [multiplier]	; load multiplier in dx
11	
12	checkbit:	shr dx, 1	; move right most bit in carry
13	jnc skip	; skip addition if bit is zero
14	
15	mov ax, [multiplicand]
16	add [result], ax	; add less significant word
17	mov ax, [multiplicand+2]
18	adc [result+2], ax	; add more significant word
19	
20	skip:	shl word [multiplicand], 1
21	rcl word [multiplicand+2], 1 ; shift multiplicand left
22	dec cl	; decrement bit count
23	jnz checkbit	; repeat if bits left
24	
25	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
26	int 0x21
05-07	The multiplicand and the result are stored in 32bit space while
	the multiplier is stored as a word.
10	The multiplier is loaded in DX where it will be shifted bit by bit. It
15-18	can be directly shifted in memory as well.
The multiplicand is added to the result using extended 32bit
20-21	addition.
The multiplicand is shifted left as a 32bit number using extended
	shifting operation.

The multiplicand will occupy the space from 0103-0106, the multiplier will occupy space from 0107-0108 and the result will occupy the space from 0109-010C. Inside the debugger observe the changes in these memory locations during the course of the algorithm. The extended shifting and addition operations provide the same effect as would be provided if there were 32bit addition and shifting operations available in the instruction set.
At the end of the algorithm the result memory locations contain the value 0009EB10 which is 65000 in decimal; the desired answer. Also observe that the number 00000514 which is 1300 in decimal, our multiplicand, has become 05140000 after being left shifted 16 times. Our extended shifting has given the same result as if a 32bit number is left shifted 16 times as a unit.
There are many other important applications of the shifting and rotation operations in addition to this example of the multiplication algorithm. More examples will come in coming chapters.

4.5.	BITWISE LOGICAL OPERATIONS 
The 8088 processor provides us with a few logical operations that operate at the bit level. The logical operations are the same as discussed in computer logic design; however our perspective will be a little different. The four basic operations are AND, OR, XOR, and NOT. 
The important thing about these operations is that they are bitwise. This means that if “and ax, bx” instruction is given, then the operation of AND is applied on corresponding bits of AX and BX. There are 16 AND operations as a result; one for every bit of AX. Bit 0 of AX will be set if both its original value and Bit 0 of BX are set, bit 1 will be set if both its original value and Bit 1 of BX are set, and so on for the remaining bits. These operations are conducted in parallel on the sixteen bits. Similarly the operations of other logical operations are bitwise as well.
 

AND operation 
AND performs the logical bitwise and of the two operands (byte or word) and returns the result to the destination operand. A bit in the result is set if both corresponding bits of the original operands are set; otherwise the bit is cleared as shown in the truth table. 
Examples are “and ax, bx” and “and byte [mem], 5.” All 
possibilities that are legal for addition are also legal for the AND operation. The different thing is the bitwise behavior of this operation.

OR operation
OR performs the logical bitwise “inclusive or” of the two operands (byte or word) and returns the result to the destination operand. A bit in the result is set if either or both corresponding bits in the original operands are set otherwise the result bit is cleared as shown in the truth table. Examples are “or ax, bx” and “or byte [mem], 5.”

XOR operation 
XOR (Exclusive Or) performs the logical bitwise “exclusive or” of the two operands and returns the result to the destination operand. A bit in the result is set if the corresponding bits of the original operands contain opposite values (one is set, the other is cleared) otherwise the result bit is cleared as shown in the truth table. XOR
is a very important operation due to the property that it is a reversible operation. It is used in many cryptography algorithms, image processing, and in drawing operations. Examples are “xor ax, bx” and “xor byte [mem], 5.”

NOT operation 
NOT inverts the bits (forms the one’s complement) of the byte or word operand. Unlike the other logical operations, this is a single operand instruction, and is not purely a logical operation in the sense the others are, but it is still traditionally counted in the same set. Examples are “not ax” and “not byte [mem]”.

4.6.	MASKING OPERATIONS 

Selective Bit Clearing
Another use of AND is to make selective bits zero in its destination operand. The source operand is loaded with a mask containing one at positions which are retain their old value and zero at positions which are to be zeroed. The effect of applying this operation on the destination with mask in the source is to clear the desired bits. This operation is called masking. For example if the lower nibble is to be cleared then the operation can be applied with F0 in the source. The upper nibble will retain its old value and the lower nibble will be cleared.

Selective Bit Setting
The OR operation can be used as a masking operation to set selective bits. The bits in the mask are cleared at positions which are to retain their values, and are set at positions which are to be set. For example to set the lower nibble of the destination operand, the operation should be applied with a mask of 0F in the source. The upper nibble will retain its value and the lower nibble will be set as a result.
 

Selective Bit Inversion
XOR can also be used as a masking operation to invert selective bits. The bits in the mask are cleared at positions, which are to retain their values, and are set at positions, which are to be inverted. For example to invert the lower nibble of the destination operand, the operand should be applied with a mask of 0F in the source. The upper nibble will retain its value and the lower nibble will be set as a result. Compare this with NOT which inverts everything. XOR on the other hand allows inverting selective bits.

Selective Bit Testing
AND can be used to check whether particular bits of a number are set or not. Previously we used shifting and JC to test bits one by one. Now we introduce another way to test bits, which is more powerful in the sense that any bit can be tested anytime and not necessarily in order. AND can be applied on a destination with a 1-bit in the desired position and a source, which is to be checked. If the destination is zero as a result, which can be checked with a JZ instruction, the bit at the desired position in the source was clear.
However the AND operation destroys the destination mask, which might be needed later as well. Therefore Intel provided us with another instruction analogous to CMP, which is non-destructive subtraction. This is the TEST instruction and is a non-destructive AND operation. It doesn’t change the destination and only sets the flags according to the AND operation. By checking the flags, we can see if the desired bit was set or cleared.
We change our multiplication algorithm to use selective bit testing instead of checking bits one by one using the shifting operations.

Example 4.3
01	; 16bit multiplication using test for bit testing
02	[org 0x0100]
03	jmp start
04	
05	multiplicand: dd	1300	; 16bit multiplicand 32bit space
06	multiplier:	dw	500	; 16bit multiplier
07	result:	dd	0	; 32bit result
08	
09	start:	mov cl, 16	; initialize bit count to 16
10	mov bx, 1	; initialize bit mask
11	
12	checkbit:	test bx, [multiplier]	; test right most bit
13	jz	skip	; skip addition if bit is zero
14	
15	mov ax, [multiplicand]
16	add [result], ax	; add less significant word
17	mov ax, [multiplicand+2]
18	adc [result+2], ax	; add more significant word
19	
20	skip:	shl word [multiplicand], 1
21	rcl word [multiplicand+2], 1 ; shift multiplicand left
22	shl bx, 1	; shift mask towards next bit
23	dec cl	; decrement bit count
24	jnz checkbit	; repeat if bits left
25	
26	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
27	int 0x21
12

22-24	The test instruction is used for bit testing. BX holds the mask and in every next iteration it is shifting left, as our concerned bit is now the next bit.
We can do without counting in this example. We can stop as soon as our mask in BX becomes zero. These are the small tricks that assembly allows us to do and optimize our code as a result.
 

Inside the debugger observe that both the memory location and the mask in BX do not change as a result of TEST instruction. Also observe how our mask is shifting towards the left so that the next TEST instruction tests the next bit. In the end we get the same result of 0009EB10 as in the previous example.

EXERCISES
1.	Write a program to swap every pair of bits in the AX register.
2.	Give the value of the AX register and the carry flag after each of the following instructions.
stc
mov ax, <your rollnumber>
adc ah, <first character of your name> cmc
xor ah, al mov cl, 4 shr al, cl rcr ah, cl
3.	Write a program to swap the nibbles in each byte of the AX register.
4.	Calculate the number of one bits in BX and complement an equal number of least significant bits in AX.
HINT: Use the XOR instruction
5.	Write a program to multiply two 32bit numbers and store the answer in a 64bit location.
6.	Declare a 32byte buffer containing random data. Consider for this problem that the bits in these 32 bytes are numbered from 0 to 255. Declare another byte that contains the starting bit number. Write a program to copy the byte starting at this starting bit number in the AX register. Be careful that the starting bit number may not be a multiple of 8 and therefore the bits of the desired byte will be split into two bytes.
7.	AX contains a number between 0-15. Write code to complement the corresponding bit in BX. For example if AX contains 6; complement the 6th bit of BX.
8.	AX contains a non-zero number. Count the number of ones in it and store the result back in AX. Repeat the process on the result (AX) until AX contains one. Calculate in BX the number of iterations it took to make AX one. For example BX should contain 2 in the following case:
AX = 1100 0101 1010 0011 (input – 8 ones)
AX = 0000 0000 0000 1000 (after first iteration – 1 one)
AX = 0000 0000 0000 0001 (after second iteration – 1 one) STOP
 

 
5
Subroutines

5.1.	PROGRAM FLOW
Till now we have accumulated the very basic tools of assembly language programming. A very important weapon  in our arsenal is the conditional jump instruction. During the course of last two chapters we used these tools to write two very useful algorithms of sorting and multiplication. The multiplication algorithm is useful even though there is a MUL instruction in the 8088 instruction set, which can multiply 8bit and 16bit operands. This is because of the extensibility of our algorithm, as it is not limited to 16bits and can do 32bit or 64bit multiplication with minor changes.
Both of these algorithms will be used a number of times in any program of a reasonable size and complexity. An application does not only need to multiply at a single point in code; it multiplies at a number of places. If  multiplication or sorting is needed at 100 places in code, copying it 100  times is a totally infeasible solution. Maintaining such a code is an  impossible task.
The straightforward solution to this problem using the concepts we have acquainted till now is to write the code at one place with a label, and whenever we need to sort we jump to this label. But there is problem with this logic, and the problem is that after sorting is complete how the processor will know where to go back. The immediate answer is to jump back to a label following the jump to bubble sort. But we have jumped to bubble sort from
100 places in code. Which of the 100 positions in code should we jump back? Jump back at the first invocation, but jump has a single fixed target. How will the second invocation work? The second jump to bubble sort will never have control back at the next line.
Instruction are tied to one another forming an execution thread, just like a knitted thread where pieces of cotton of different sizes are twisted together to form a thread. This thread of execution is our program. The jump instruction breaks this thread permanently, making a permanent diversion, like a turn on a highway. The conditional jump selects one of the two possible directions, like right or left turn on a road. So there is no concept of returning.
 However there are roundabouts on roads as well that take us back from  where we started after having traveled on the boundary of the round. This is  the concept of a temporary diversion. Two or more permanent diversions can  take us back from where we started, just like two or more road turns can  take us back to the starting point, but they are still permanent diversions in their nature.
We need some way to implement the concept of temporary diversion in assembly language. We want to create a roundabout of bubble sort, another roundabout of our multiplication algorithm, so that we can enter into the roundabout whenever we need it and return back to wherever we left from after completing the round.
 

Program

Key point in the above discussion is returning to where we left from, like a loop in a knitted thread. Diversion should be temporary and not permanent. The code of bubble sort written at one place, multiply at another, and we temporarily divert to that place, thus avoiding a repetition of code at a 100 places.

CALL and RET 
In every processor, instructions are available to divert temporarily and to divert permanently. The instructions for permanent diversion in 8088 are the  jump instructions, while the instruction for temporary diversion is the CALL  instruction. The word call must be familiar to the readers from subroutine  call in higher level languages. The CALL instruction allows temporary  diversion and therefore reusability of code. Now we can place the code for  bubble sort at one place and reuse it again and again. This was not possible with	permanent	diversion.	Actually	the	8088	permanent	diversion  mechanism can be tricked to achieve temporary diversion. However it is not  possible without getting into a lot of trouble. The key idea in doing it this way is to use the jump instruction form that takes a register as argument. Therefore this is not impossible but this is not the way it is done.
The natural way to do this is to use the CALL instruction followed by a label, just like JMP is followed by a label. Execution will divert to the code following the label. Till now the operation has been similar to the JMP instruction. When the subroutine completes we need to return. The RET instruction is used for this purpose. The word return holds in its meaning that we are to return from where we came and need no explicit destination. Therefore RET takes no arguments and transfers control back to the instruction following the CALL that took us in this subroutine. The actual technical process that informs RET where to return will be discussed later after we have discussed the system stack.
  CALL takes a label as argument and execution starts from that label, until  the RET instruction is encountered and it takes execution back to the  instruction following the CALL. Both the instructions are commonly used as  a pair, however technically they are independent in their operation. The RET works regardless of the CALL and the CALL works regardless of the RET. If you CALL a subroutine it will not complain if there is no RET present and similarly if you RET without being called it won’t complain. It is a logical pair and is used as a pair in every decent code. However sometimes we play tricks with the processor and we use CALL or RET alone. This will become clear when we need to play such tricks in later chapters.
 

Parameters 
We intend to write the bubble sort code at one place and CALL it whenever needed. An immediately visible problem is that whenever we call this subroutine it will sort the same array in the same order. However in a real application we will need to sort various arrays of various sizes. We might sometimes need an ascending sort and descending at other times. Similarly
 
straightforward way is to use registers. The CALL mechanism breaks the thread of execution and does not change registers, except IP which must change for processor to start executing at another place, and SP whose change will be discussed in detail later. Any of the other registers can hold parameters for the subroutine.
5.2.	OUR FIRST SUBROUTINE 
Now we want to modify the bubble sort code so that it works as a subroutine. We place a label at the start of bubble sort code, which works as the anchor point and will be used in the CALL instruction to call the subroutine. We also place a RET at the end of the algorithm to return from where we called the subroutine.

Example 5.1
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37	; bubble sort algorithm as a subroutine [org 0x0100]
jmp start
data:	dw	60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0
swap:	db	0
bubblesort:	dec cx	; last element not compared shl cx, 1	; turn into byte count
mainloop:	mov si, 0	; initialize array index to zero mov byte [swap], 0	; reset swap flag to no swaps
innerloop:	mov ax, [bx+si]	; load number in ax
cmp ax, [bx+si+2]	; compare with next number jbe noswap	; no swap if already in order
mov dx, [bx+si+2]	; load second element in dx mov [bx+si], dx	; store first number in second mov [bx+si+2], ax	; store second number in first
mov byte [swap], 1	; flag that a swap has been done
noswap:	add si, 2	; advance si to next index cmp si, cx	; are we at last index
jne innerloop	; if not compare next two
cmp byte [swap], 1	; check if a swap has been done je	mainloop	; if yes make another pass
ret	; go back to where we came from start:	mov bx, data	; send start of array in bx
mov cx, 10	; send count of elements in cx call bubblesort	; call our subroutine
mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program int 0x21
08-09	The routine has received the count of elements in CX. Since it makes one less comparison than the number of elements it decrements it. Then it multiplies it by two since this a word array and each element
 


14


32-37		takes two bytes. Left shifting has been used to multiply by two. Base+index+offset addressing has been used. BX holds the start of array, SI the offset into it and an offset of 2 when the next element is to be read. BX can be directly changed but then a separate counter would be needed, as SI is directly compared with CX in our case.
The code starting from the start label is our main program analogous to the main in the C language. BX and CX hold our
parameters for the bubblesort subroutine and the CALL is made to invoke the subroutine.

Inside the debugger we observe the same unsigned data that we are so used to now. The number 0103 is passed via BX to the subroutine which is the start of our data and the number 000A via CX which is the number of elements in our data. If we step over the CALL instruction we see our data sorted in a single step and we are at the termination instructions. The processor has jumped to the bubblesort routine, executed it to completion, and returned back from it but the process was hidden due to the step over command. If however we trace into the CALL instruction, we land at the first instruction of our routine. At the end of the routine, when the RET instruction is executed, we immediately land back to our termination instructions, to be precise the instruction following the CALL.
Also observe that with the CALL instruction SP is decremented by two from FFFE to FFFC, and the stack windows shows 0150 at its top. As the RET is executed SP is recovered and the 0150 is also removed from the stack. Match it with the address of the instruction following the CALL which is 0150 as well. The 0150 removed from the stack by the RET instruction has been loaded into the IP register thereby resuming execution from address 0150. CALL placed where to return on the stack for the RET instruction. The stack is automatically used with the CALL and RET instructions. Stack will be explained in detail later, however the idea is that the one who is departing stores the address to return at a known place. This is the place using which CALL and RET coordinate. How this placed is actually used by the CALL and RET instructions will be described after the stack is discussed.
After emphasizing reusability so much, it is time for another example which uses the same bubblesort routine on two different arrays of different sizes.

Example 5.2
01		; bubble sort subroutine called twice
02		[org 0x0100]
03		jmp start
04		
05		data:	dw	60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0
06		data2:	dw	328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98
07		dw	888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5
08		swap:	db	0
09		
10		bubblesort:	dec cx	; last element not compared
11		shl cx, 1	; turn into byte count
12		
13		mainloop:	mov si, 0	; initialize array index to zero
14		mov byte [swap], 0	; reset swap flag to no swaps
15		
16		innerloop:	mov ax, [bx+si]	; load number in ax
17		cmp ax, [bx+si+2]	; compare with next number
18		jbe noswap	; no swap if already in order
19		
20		mov dx, [bx+si+2]	; load second element in dx
21		mov [bx+si], dx	; store first number in second
22		mov [bx+si+2], ax	; store second number in first
23		mov byte [swap], 1	; flag that a swap has been done
24		
25		noswap:	add si, 2	; advance si to next index
 

26		cmp	si, cx		;	are we at last index
27		jne	innerloop		;	if not compare next two
28						
29		cmp	byte [swap],	1	;	check if a swap has been done
30		je	mainloop		;	if yes make another pass
31						
32		ret			;	go back to where we came from
33						
34	start:	mov	bx, data		;	send start of array in bx
35		mov	cx, 10		;	send count of elements in cx
36		call	bubblesort		;	call our subroutine
37						
38		mov	bx, data2		;	send start of array in bx
39		mov	cx, 20		;	send count of elements in cx
40		call	bubblesort		;	call our subroutine again
41						
42		mov	ax, 0x4c00		;	terminate program
43		int	0x21			
05-07


34-40	There are two different data arrays declared. One of 10 elements and the other of 20 elements. The second array is declared on two lines, where the second line is continuation of the first. No additional label is needed since they are situated consecutively in memory.
The other change is in the main where the bubblesort subroutine is called twice, once on the first array and once on the second.

Inside the debugger observe that stepping over the first call, the first array is sorted and stepping over the second call the second array is sorted. If however we step in SP is decremented and the stack holds 0178 which is the address of the instruction following the call. The RET consumes that 0178 and restores SP. The next CALL places 0181 on the stack and SP is again decremented. The RET consumes this number and execution resumes from the instruction at 0181. This is the coordinated function of CALL and RET using the stack.
In both of the above examples,  there is a shortcoming. The subroutine to sort the elements is destroying the registers AX, CX, DX, and SI. That means that the caller of this routine has to make sure that it does not hold any important data in these registers before calling this function, because after the call has returned the registers will be containing meaningless data for the caller. With a program containing thousands of subroutines expecting the caller to remember the set of modified registers for each subroutine is unrealistic and unreasonable. Also registers are limited in number, and restricting the caller on the use of register will make the caller’s job very tough. This shortcoming will be removed using the very important system stack.

5.3.	STACK
Stack is a data structure that behaves in a first in last out manner. It can contain many elements and there is only one way in and out of the container. When an element is inserted it sits on top of all other elements and when an element is removed the one sitting at top of all others is removed first. To visualize the structure consider a test tube and put some balls in it. The second ball will come above the first and the third will come above the second. When a ball is taken out only the one at the top can be removed. The operation of placing an element on top of the stack is called pushing the element and the operation of removing an element from the top of the stack is called popping the element. The last thing pushed is popped out first; the last in first out behavior.
We can peek at any ball inside the test tube but we cannot remove it without removing every ball on top of it. Similarly we can read any element from the stack but cannot remove it without removing everything above it. The stack operations of pushing and popping only work at the top of the
 

 
Whenever an element is pushed on the stack SP is decremented by two as the 8088 stack works on word sized elements. Single bytes cannot be pushed or popped from the stack. Also it is a decrementing stack. Another possibility is an incrementing stack. A decrementing stack moves from higher addresses  to lower addresses as elements are added in it while an incrementing stack  moves from lower addresses to higher addresses as elements are added.  There is no special reason or argument in favor of one or another, and more or less depends on the choice of the designers. Another processor 8051 by the same manufacturer has an incrementing stack while 8088 has a decrementing one.
Memory is like a shelf numbered as zero at the top and the maximum at the bottom. If a decrementing stack starts at shelf 5, the first item is placed in shelf 5, the next item is placed in shelf 4, the next in shelf 3 and so on. The operations of placing items on the stack and removing them from there are called push and pop. The push operation copies its operand on the stack, while the pop operation makes a copy from the top of the stack into its operand. When an item is pushed on a decrementing stack, the top of the stack is first decremented and the element is then copied into this space. With a pop the element at the top of the stack is copied into the pop operand and the top of stack is incremented afterwards.
The basic use of the stack is to save things and recover from there when needed. For example we discussed the shortcoming in our last example that it destroyed the caller’s registers, and the callers are not supposed to remember which registers are destroyed by the thousand routines they use. Using the stack the subroutine can save the caller’s value of the registers on the stack, and recover them from there before returning. Meanwhile the subroutine can freely use the registers. From the caller’s point of view if the registers contain the same value before and after the call, it doesn’t matter if the subroutine used them meanwhile.
Similarly during the CALL operation, the current value of the instruction pointer is automatically saved on the stack, and the destination of CALL is loaded in the instruction pointer. Execution therefore resumes from the destination of CALL. When the RET instruction is executed, it recovers the value of the instruction pointer from the stack. The next instruction executed is therefore the one following the CALL. Observe how playing with the instruction pointer affects the program flow.
There is a form of the RET instruction called “RET n” where n is a numeric argument. After performing the operation of RET, it further increments the stack pointer by this number, i.e. SP is first incremented by two and then by
n. Its function will become clear when parameter passing is discussed.
Now we describe the operation of the stack in CALL and RET with an example. The top of stack stored in the stack pointer is initialized at 2000. The space above SP is considered empty and free. When the stack pointer is decremented by two, we took a word from the empty space and can use it for our purpose. The unit of stack operations is a word. Some instructions push multiple words; however byte pushes cannot be made. Now the value 017B is stored in the word reserved on the stack. The RET will copy this value in the instruction pointer and increment the stack pointer by two making it 2000 again, thereby reverting the operation of CALL.
This is how CALL and RET behave for near calls. There is also a far version of these functions when the target routine is in another segment. This version of CALL takes a segment offset pair just like the far jump instruction. The CALL will push both the segment and the offset on the stack in this case, followed by loading CS and IP with the values given in the instruction.
 

The corresponding instruction RETF will pop the offset in the instruction pointer followed by popping the segment in the code segment register.
Apart from CALL and RET, the operations that use the stack are PUSH and POP. Two other operations that will be discussed later are INT and IRET. Regarding the stack, the operation of PUSH is similar to CALL however with a register other than the instruction pointer. For example “push ax” will push the current value of the AX register on the stack. The operation of PUSH is shown below.
SP  SP – 2 [SP]  AX
The operation of POP is the reverse of this. A copy of the element at the top of the stack is made in the operand, and the top of the stack is incremented afterwards. The operation of “pop ax” is shown below.
AX  [SP] SP  SP + 2
Making corresponding PUSH and POP operations is the responsibility of the programmer. If “push ax” is followed by “pop dx” effectively copying the value of the AX register in the DX register, the processor won’t complain. Whether this sequence is logically correct or not should be ensured by the programmer. For example when PUSH and POP are used to save and restore registers from the stack, order must be correct so that the saved value of AX is reloaded in the AX register and not any other register. For this the order of POP operations need to be the reverse of the order of PUSH operations.
Now we consider another example that is similar to the previous examples, however the code to swap the two elements has been extracted into another subroutine, so that the formation of stack can be observed during nested subroutine calls.

Example 5.3
01	; bubble sort subroutine using swap subroutine
02	[org 0x0100]
03	jmp start
04	
05	data:	dw	60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0
06	data2:	dw	328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98
07	dw	888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5
08	swapflag:	db	0
09	
10	swap:	mov ax, [bx+si]	; load first number in ax
11	xchg ax, [bx+si+2]	; exchange with second number
12	mov [bx+si], ax	; store second number in first
13	ret	; go back to where we came from
14	
15	bubblesort:	dec cx	; last element not compared
16	shl cx, 1	; turn into byte count
17	
18	mainloop:	mov si, 0	; initialize array index to zero
19	mov byte [swapflag], 0 ; reset swap flag to no swaps
20	
21	innerloop:	mov ax, [bx+si]	; load number in ax
22	cmp ax, [bx+si+2]	; compare with next number
23	jbe noswap	; no swap if already in order
24	
25	call swap	; swaps two elements
26	mov byte [swapflag], 1 ; flag that a swap has been done
27	
28	noswap:	add si, 2	; advance si to next index
29	cmp si, cx	; are we at last index
30	jne innerloop	; if not compare next two
31	
32	cmp byte [swapflag], 1 ; check if a swap has been done
33	je	mainloop	; if yes make another pass
34	ret	; go back to where we came from
35	
36	start:	mov bx, data	; send start of array in bx
37	mov cx, 10	; send count of elements in cx
 

 
Inside the debugger observe the use of stack by CALL and RET instructions, especially the nested CALL.

5.4.	SAVING AND RESTORING REGISTERS 
The subroutines we wrote till now have been destroying certain registers and our calling code has been carefully written to not use those registers. However this cannot be remembered for a good number of subroutines. Therefore our subroutines need to implement some mechanism of retaining the callers’ value of any registers used.
The trick is to use the PUSH and POP operations and save the callers’ value on the stack and recover it from there on return. Our swap subroutine  destroyed the AX register while the bubblesort subroutine destroyed AX, CX,  and SI. BX was not modified in the subroutine. It had the same value at  entry and at exit; it was only used by the subroutine. Our next example  improves on the previous version by saving and restoring any registers that it  will modify using the PUSH and POP operations.

Example 5.4
01		; bubble sort and swap subroutines saving and restoring registers
02		[org 0x0100]
03		jmp start
04		
05		data:	dw	60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0
06		data2:	dw	328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98
07			dw	888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5
08		swapflag:	db	0
09		
10		swap:	push	ax	; save old value of ax
11		
12			mov	ax, [bx+si]	; load first number in ax
13			xchg	ax, [bx+si+2]	; exchange with second number
14			mov	[bx+si], ax	; store second number in first
15		
16			pop	ax	; restore old value of ax
17			ret	; go back to where we came from
18		
19		bubblesort:	push	ax	; save old value of ax
20			push	cx	; save old value of cx
21			push	si	; save old value of si
22		
23			dec	cx	; last element not compared
24			shl	cx, 1	; turn into byte count
25		
26		mainloop:	mov	si, 0	; initialize array index to zero
27			mov	byte [swapflag], 0 ; reset swap flag to no swaps
28		
29		innerloop:	mov	ax, [bx+si]	; load number in ax
30			cmp	ax, [bx+si+2]	; compare with next number
31			jbe	noswap	; no swap if already in order
32		
 

33		call	swap		;	swaps two elements
34		mov	byte [swapflag],	1	;	flag that a swap has been done
35						
36	noswap:	add	si, 2		;	advance si to next index
37		cmp	si, cx		;	are we at last index
38		jne	innerloop		;	if not compare next two
39						
40		cmp	byte [swapflag],	1	;	check if a swap has been done
41		je	mainloop		;	if yes make another pass
42						
43		pop	si		;	restore old value of si
44		pop	cx		;	restore old value of cx
45		pop	ax		;	restore old value of ax
46		ret			;	go back to where we came from
47						
48	start:	mov	bx, data		;	send start of array in bx
49		mov	cx, 10		;	send count of elements in cx
50		call	bubblesort		;	call our subroutine
51						
52		mov	bx, data2		;	send start of array in bx
53		mov	cx, 20		;	send count of elements in cx
54		call	bubblesort		;	call our subroutine again
55						
56		mov	ax, 0x4c00		;	terminate program
57		int	0x21			
19-21	When multiple registers are pushed, order is very important. If AX, CX, and SI are pushed in this order, they must be popped in the
reverse order of SI, CX, and AX. This is again because the stack behaves in a Last In First Out manner.

Inside the debugger we can observe that the registers before and after the CALL operation are exactly identical. Effectively the caller can assume the registers are untouched. By tracing into the subroutines we can observe how their value is saved on the stack by the PUSH instructions and recovered from their before exit. Saving and restoring registers this way in subroutines is a standard way and must be followed.

PUSH 
PUSH decrements SP (the stack pointer) by two and then transfers a word from the source operand to the top of stack now pointed to by SP. PUSH often is used to place parameters on the stack before calling a procedure; more generally, it is the basic means of storing temporary data on the stack.

POP 
POP transfers the word at the current top of stack (pointed to by SP) to the destination operand and then increments SP by two to point to the new top  of stack. POP can be used to move temporary variables from the stack to registers or memory.
Observe that the operand of PUSH is called a source operand since the data is moving to the stack from the operand, while the operand of POP is called destination since data is moving from the stack to the operand.

CALL 
CALL activates an out-of-line procedure, saving information on the stack to permit a RET (return) instruction in the procedure to transfer control back to the instruction following the CALL. For an intra segment direct CALL, SP is decremented by two and IP is pushed onto the stack. The target procedure’s relative displacement from the CALL instruction is then added to the instruction pointer. For an inter segment direct CALL, SP is decremented by two, and CS is pushed onto the stack. CS is replaced by the segment word contained in the instruction. SP again is decremented by two. IP is pushed onto the stack and replaced by the offset word in the instruction.
 

The out-of-line procedure is the temporary division, the concept of roundabout that we discussed. Near calls are also called intra segment calls, while far calls are called inter-segment calls. There are also versions that are called indirect calls; however they will be discuss later when they are used.

RET 
RET (Return) transfers control from a procedure back to the instruction following the CALL that activated the procedure. RET pops the word at the top of the stack (pointed to by register SP) into the instruction pointer and increments SP by two. If RETF (inter segment RET) is used the word at the top of the stack is popped into the IP register and SP is incremented by two. The word at the new top of stack is popped into the CS register, and SP is again incremented by two. If an optional pop value has been specified, RET adds that value to SP. This feature may be used to discard parameters pushed onto the stack before the execution of the CALL instruction.

5.5.	PARAMETER PASSING THROUGH STACK 
Due to the limited number of registers, parameter passing by registers is constrained in two ways. The maximum parameters a subroutine can receive are seven when all the general registers are used. Also, with the subroutines are themselves limited in their use of registers, and this limited increases when the subroutine has to make a nested call thereby using certain registers as its parameters. Due to this, parameter passing by registers is not expandable and generalizable. However this is the fastest mechanism available for passing parameters and is used where speed is important.
Considering stack as an alternate, we observe that whatever data is placed there, it stays there, and across function calls as well. For example the bubble sort subroutine needs an array address and the count of elements. If we place both of these on the stack, and call the subroutine afterwards, it will stay there. The subroutine is invoked with its return address on top of the stack and its parameters beneath it.
To access the arguments from the stack, the immediate idea that strikes is to pop them off the stack. And this is the only possibility using the given set of information. However the first thing popped off the stack would be the return address and not the arguments. This is because the arguments were first pushed on the stack and the subroutine was called afterwards. The arguments cannot be popped without first popping the return address. If a heaving thing falls on someone’s leg, the heavy thing is removed first and the leg is not pulled out to reduce the damage. Same is the case with our parameters on which the return address has fallen.
  To handle this using PUSH and POP, we must first pop the return address  in a register, then pop the operands, and push the return address back on  the stack so that RET will function normally. However so much effort doesn’t seem to pay back the price. Processor designers should have provided a logical and neat way to perform this operation. They did provided a way and infact we will do this without introducing any new instruction.
Recall that the default segment association of the BP register is the stack segment and the reason for this association had been deferred for now. The reason is to peek inside the stack using the BP register and read the parameters without removing them and without touching the stack pointer. The stack pointer could not be used for this purpose, as it cannot be used in an effective address. It is automatically used as a pointer and cannot be explicitly used. Also the stack pointer is a dynamic pointer and sometimes changes without telling us in the background. It is just that whenever we touch it, it is where we expect it to be. The base pointer is provided as a replacement of the stack pointer so that we can peek inside the stack without modifying the structure of the stack.
 

When the bubble sort subroutine is called, the stack pointer is pointing to the return address. Two bytes below it is the second parameter and four bytes below is the first parameter. The stack pointer is a reference point to these parameters. If the value of SP is captured in BP, then the return address is located at [bp+0], the second parameter is at [bp+2], and the first parameter is at [bp+4]. This is because SP and BP both had the same value and they both defaulted to the same segment, the stack segment.
This copying of SP into BP is like taking a snapshot or like freezing the stack at that moment. Even if more pushes are made on the stack decrementing the stack pointer, our reference point will not change. The parameters will still be accessible at the same offsets from the base pointer. If however the stack pointer increments beyond the base pointer, the references will become invalid. The base pointer will act as the datum point to access our parameters. However we have destroyed the original value of BP in the process, and this will cause problems in nested calls where both the outer and the inner subroutines need to access their own parameters. The outer subroutine will have its base pointer destroyed after the call and will be unable to access its parameters.
To solve both of these problems, we reach at the standard way of accessing parameters on the stack. The first two instructions of any subroutines accessing its parameters from the stack are given below.
push bp mov bp, sp
As a result our datum point has shifted by a word. Now the old value of BP will be contained in [bp] and the return address will be at [bp+2]. The second parameters will be [bp+4] while the first one will be at [bp+6]. We give an example of bubble sort subroutine using this standard way of argument passing through stack.

Example 5.5
01	; bubble sort subroutine taking parameters from stack
02	[org 0x0100]
03	jmp start
04	
05	data:	dw	60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0
06	data2:	dw	328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98
07	dw	888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5
08	swapflag:	db	0
09	
10	bubblesort:	push bp	; save old value of bp
11	mov bp, sp	; make bp our reference point
12	push ax	; save old value of ax
13	push bx	; save old value of bx
14	push cx	; save old value of cx
15	push si	; save old value of si
16	
17	mov bx, [bp+6]	; load start of array in bx
18	mov cx, [bp+4]	; load count of elements in cx
19	dec cx	; last element not compared
20	shl cx, 1	; turn into byte count
21	
22	mainloop:	mov si, 0	; initialize array index to zero
23	mov byte [swapflag], 0 ; reset swap flag to no swaps
24	
25	innerloop:	mov ax, [bx+si]	; load number in ax
26	cmp ax, [bx+si+2]	; compare with next number
27	jbe noswap	; no swap if already in order
28	
29	xchg ax, [bx+si+2]	; exchange ax with second number
30	mov [bx+si], ax	; store second number in first
31	mov byte [swapflag], 1 ; flag that a swap has been done
32	
33	noswap:	add si, 2	; advance si to next index
34	cmp si, cx	; are we at last index
35	jne innerloop	; if not compare next two
36	
 

37		cmp	byte [swapflag],	1	;	check if a swap has been done
38		je	mainloop		;	if yes make another pass
39						
40		pop	si		;	restore old value of si
41		pop	cx		;	restore old value of cx
42		pop	bx		;	restore old value of bx
43		pop	ax		;	restore old value of ax
44		pop	bp		;	restore old value of bp
45		ret	4		;	go back and remove two params
46						
47	start:	mov	ax, data			
48		push	ax		;	place start of array on stack
49		mov	ax, 10			
50		push	ax		;	place element count on stack
51		call	bubblesort		;	call our subroutine
52						
53		mov	ax, data2			
54		push	ax		;	place start of array on stack
55		mov	ax, 20			
56		push	ax		;	place element count on stack
57		call	bubblesort		;	call our subroutine again
58						
59		mov	ax, 0x4c00		;	terminate program
60		int	0x21			
11	The value of the stack pointer is captured in the base pointer. With
	further pushes SP will change but BP will not and therefore we will
45	read parameters from bp+4 and bp+6.
The form of RET that takes an argument is used causing four to be
	added to SP after the return address has been popped in the
	instruction pointer. This will effectively discard the parameters that
47-50	are still there on the stack.
We push the address of the array we want to sort followed by the
	count of elements. As immediate cannot be directly pushed in the
	8088 architecture, we first load it in the AX register and then push
	the AX register on the stack.

Inside the debugger, concentrate on the operation of BP and the stack. The parameters are placed on the stack by the caller, the subroutine accesses them using the base pointer, and the special form of RET removes them without any extra instruction. The value of stack pointer of FFF6 is turned into FFFE by the RET instruction. This was the value in SP before any of the parameters was pushed.

Stack Clearing by Caller or Callee 
Parameters pushed for a subroutine are a waste after the subroutine has returned. They have to be cleared from the stack. Either of the caller and the callee can take the responsibility of clearing them from there. If the callee has to clear the stack it cannot do this easily unless RET n exists. That is why most general processors have this instruction. Stack clearing by the caller needs an extra instruction on behalf of the caller after every call made to the subroutine, unnecessarily increasing instructions in the program. If there are thousand calls to a subroutine the code to clear the stack is repeated a thousand times. Therefore the prevalent convention in most high level languages is stack clearing by the callee; even though the other convention is still used in some languages.
If RET n is not available, stack clearing by the callee is a complicated process. It will have to save the return address in a register, then remove the parameters, and then place back the return address so that RET will function. When this instruction was introduced in processors, only then high level language designers switched to stack clearing by the callee. This is also exactly why RET n adds n to SP after performing the operation of RET. The other way around would be totally useless for our purpose. Consider the stack condition at the time of RET and this will become clear why this will be
 

useless. Also observe that RET n has discarded the arguments rather than popping them as they were no longer of any use either of the caller or the callee.
The strong argument in favour of callee cleared stacks is that the arguments were placed on the stack for the subroutine, the caller did not needed them for itself, so the subroutine is responsible for removing them. Removing the arguments is important as if the stack is not cleared or is partially cleared the stack will eventually become full, SP will reach 0, and thereafter wraparound producing unexpected results. This is called stack overflow. Therefore clearing anything placed on the stack is very important.

5.6.	LOCAL VARIABLES 
Another important role of the stack is in the creation of local variables that are only needed while the subroutine is in execution and not afterwards. They should not take permanent space like global variables. Local variables should be created when the subroutine is called and discarded afterwards. So that the spaced used by them can be reused for the local variables of another subroutine. They only have meaning inside the subroutine and no meaning outside it.
The most convenient place to store these variables is the stack. We need some special manipulation of the stack for this task. We need to produce a gap in the stack for our variables. This is explained with the help of the swapflag in the bubble sort example.
The swapflag we have declared as a word occupying space permanently is only needed by the bubble sort subroutine and should be a local variable. Actually the variable was introduced with the intent of making it a local variable at this time. The stack pointer will be decremented by an extra two bytes thereby producing a gap in which a word can reside. This gap will be used for our temporary, local, or automatic variable; however we name it. We can decrement it as much as we want producing the desired space, however the decrement must be by an even number, as the unit of stack operation is a word. In our case we needed just one word. Also the most convenient position for this gap is immediately after saving the value of SP in BP. So that the same base pointer can be used to access the local variables as well; this time using negative offsets. The standard way to start a subroutine which needs to access parameters and has local variables is as under.
push bp mov bp, sp sub sp, 2
The gap could have been created with a dummy push, but the subtraction makes it clear that the value pushed is not important and the gap will be used for our local variable. Also gap of any size can be created in a single instruction with subtraction. The parameters can still be accessed at bp+4 and bp+6 and the swapflag can be accessed at bp-2. The subtraction in SP was after taking the snapshot; therefore BP is above the parameters but below the local variables. The parameters are therefore accessed using positive offsets from BP and the local variables are accessed using negative offsets.
We modify the bubble sort subroutine to use a local variable to store the swap flag. The swap flag remembered whether a swap has been done in a particular iteration of bubble sort.

Example 5.6
01	; bubble sort subroutine using a local variable
02	[org 0x0100]
03	jmp start
04	
05	data:	dw	60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0
06	data2:	dw	328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98
 

07		dw	888, 533, 2000,	1020,	30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5
08					
09	bubblesort:	push	bp	;	save old value of bp
10		mov	bp, sp	;	make bp our reference point
11		sub	sp, 2	;	make two byte space on stack
12		push	ax	;	save old value of ax
13		push	bx	;	save old value of bx
14		push	cx	;	save old value of cx
15		push	si	;	save old value of si
16					
17		mov	bx, [bp+6]	;	load start of array in bx
18		mov	cx, [bp+4]	;	load count of elements in cx
19		dec	cx	;	last element not compared
20		shl	cx, 1	;	turn into byte count
21					
22	mainloop:	mov	si, 0	;	initialize array index to zero
23		mov	word [bp-2], 0	;	reset swap flag to no swaps
24					
25	innerloop:	mov	ax, [bx+si]	;	load number in ax
26		cmp	ax, [bx+si+2]	;	compare with next number
27		jbe	noswap	;	no swap if already in order
28					
29		xchg	ax, [bx+si+2]	;	exchange ax with second number
30		mov	[bx+si], ax	;	store second number in first
31		mov	word [bp-2], 1	;	flag that a swap has been done
32					
33	noswap:	add	si, 2	;	advance si to next index
34		cmp	si, cx	;	are we at last index
35		jne	innerloop	;	if not compare next two
36					
37		cmp	word [bp-2], 1	;	check if a swap has been done
38		je	mainloop	;	if yes make another pass
39					
40		pop	si	;	restore old value of si
41		pop	cx	;	restore old value of cx
42		pop	bx	;	restore old value of bx
43		pop	ax	;	restore old value of ax
44		mov	sp, bp	;	remove space created on stack
45		pop	bp	;	restore old value of bp
46		ret	4	;	go back and remove two params
47					
48	start:	mov	ax, data		
49		push	ax	;	place start of array on stack
50		mov	ax, 10		
51		push	ax	;	place element count on stack
52		call	bubblesort	;	call our subroutine
53					
54		mov	ax, data2		
55		push	ax	;	place start of array on stack
56		mov	ax, 20		
57		push	ax	;	place element count on stack
58		call	bubblesort	;	call our subroutine again
59					
60		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
61		int	0x21		
11	A word gap has been created for swap flag. This is equivalent to a
	dummy push. The registers are pushed above this gap.
23	The swapflag is accessed with [bp-2]. The parameters are accessed
44	in the same manner as the last examples.
We are removing the hole that we created. The hole is removed by
	restoring the value of SP that it had at the time of snapshot or at the
	value it had before the local variable was created. This can be
	replaced with “add sp, 2” however the one used in the code is
	preferred since it does not require to remember how much space for
	local variables was allocated in the start. After this operation SP
	points to the old value of BP from where we can proceed as usual.

We needed memory to store the swap flag. The fact that it is in the stack segment or the data segment doesn’t bother us. This will just change the addressing scheme.
 

EXERCISES
1.	Replace the following valid instruction with a single instruction that has the same effect. Don’t consider the effect on flags.
push word L1 jmp L2
L1:
2.	Replace the following invalid instructions with a single instruction that has the same effect.
a.	pop ip
b.	mov ip, L5
c.	sub sp, 2
mov [ss:sp], ax
d.	mov ax, [ss:sp] add sp, 2
e.	add sp, 6
mov ip, [ss:sp-6]
3.	Write a recursive function to calculate the Fibonacci of a number. The number is passed as a parameter via the stack and the calculated Fibonacci number is returned in the AX register. A local variable should be used to store the return value from the first recursive call. Fibonacci function is defined as follows:
Fibonacci(0) = 0
Fibonacci(1) = 1
Fibonacci(n) = Fibonacci(n-1) + Fibonacci(n-2)
4.	Write the above Fibonacci function iteratively.
HINT: Use two registers to hold the current and the previous Fibonacci numbers in a loop.
5.	Write a function switch_stack meant to change the current stack and will be called as below. The function should destroy no registers.
push word [new_stack_segment] push word [new_stack_offset] call switch_stack
6.	Write a function “addtoset” that takes offset of a function and remembers this offset in an array that can hold a maximum of 8 offsets. It does nothing if there are already eight offsets in the set. Write another function “callset” that makes a call to all functions in the set one by one.
7.	Do the above exercise such that “callset” does not use a CALL or a JMP to invoke the functions.
HINT: Setup the stack appropriately such that the RET will execute the first function, its RET execute the next and so on till the last RET returns to the caller of “callset.”
8.	Make an array of 0x80 bytes and treat it as one of 0x400 bits. Write a function myalloc that takes one argument, the number of bits. It finds that many consecutive zero bits in the array, makes them one, and returns in AX the index of the first bit. Write another function myfree that takes two arguments, index of a bit in the array, and the number of bits. It makes that many consecutive bits zero, whatever their previous values are, starting from the index in the first argument.
9.	[Circular Queue] Write functions to implement circular queues. Declare 16x32 words of data for 16 queues numbered from 0 to 15. Each queue has a front index, a rear index and 30 locations for data totaling to 32 words. Declare another word variable whose 16 bits correspond to the 16 queues and a 1 bit signals that the corresponding queue is used and a 0 bit signals that it is free. Write a function “qcreate” that returns a queue number after finding a free queue or -1 if it failed. Write a function “qdestroy” that marks the queue as free. Write two other functions “qadd” and “qremove” that
 

can add and remove items from the circular queue. The two functions return 0 if they failed and 1 otherwise.
10.	[Linked List] Declare 1024 nodes of four bytes each. The first 2 bytes will be used for data and the next 2 bytes for storing the offset of another node. Also declare a word variable “firstfree” to store the offset of the first free node. Write the following five functions:
a.	“init” chains all 1024 nodes into a list with offset of first node in firstfree, offset of the second node in the later two bytes of the first node and so on. The later two bytes of the last node contains zero.
b.	“createlist” returns the offset of the node stored in firstfree through AX. It sets firstfree to the offset stored in the later two bytes of that node, and it sets the later two bytes of that node to zero.
c.	“insertafter” takes two parameters, the offset of a node and a word data. It removes one node from freelist just like “createlist” and inserts it after the said node and updates the new node’s data part.
d.	“deleteafter” takes a node as its parameter and removes the node immediately after it in the linked list if there is one.
e.	“deletelist” takes a node as its parameters and traverses the linked list starting at this node and removes all nodes from it and add them back to the free list.
 
6
Display Memory

The debugger gives a very close vision of the processor. That is why every program written till now was executed inside the debugger. Also the debugger is a very useful tool in assembly language program development, since many bugs only become visible when each instruction is independently monitored the way the debugger allows us to do. We will now be using the display screen in character mode, the way DOS uses this screen. The way we will access this screen is specific to the IBM PC.

6.1.	ASCII CODES 
The computer listens, sees, and speaks in numbers. Even a character is a number inside the computer. For example the keyboard is labeled with characters however when we press ‘A’, a specific number is transferred from the keyboard to the computer. Our program interprets that number as the character ‘A’. When the same number comes on display, the Video Graphics Adapter (VGA) in our computer shows the shape of ‘A’. Even the shape is stored in binary numbers with a one bit representing a pixel on the screen that is turned on and a zero bit representing a pixel that is not glowing. This example is considering a white on black display and no colors. This is the way a shape is drawn on the screen. The interpretation of ‘A’ is performed by the VGA card, while the monitor or CRT (cathode ray tube) only glows the pixels on and turns them off. The keyboard has a key labeled ‘A’ and pressing it the screen shows ‘A’ but all that happened inside was in numbers.
 An ‘A’ on any computer and any operating system is an ‘A’ on every other  computer and operating system. This is because a standard numeric  representation of all commonly used characters has been developed. This is  called the ASCII code, where ASCII stands for American Standard Code for Information Interchange. The name depicts that this is a code that allows the interchange of information; ‘A’ written on one computer will remain an ‘A’ on another. The ASCII table lists all defined characters and symbols and their standardized numbers. All ASCII based computers use the same code. There are few other standards like EBCDIC and gray codes, but ASCII has become the most prevalent standard and is used for Internet communication as well. It has become the de facto standard for global communication. The character mode displays of our computer use the ASCII standard. Some newer operating systems use a new standard Unicode but it is not relevant to us in the current discussion.
 Standard ASCII has 128 characters with numbers assigned from 0 to 127.  When IBM PC was introduced, they extended the standard ASCII and defined  128 more characters. Thus extending the total number of symbols from 128  to 256 numbered from 0 to 255 fitting in an 8-bit byte. The newer characters  were used for line drawing, window corners, and some non-English characters. The need for these characters was never felt on teletype terminals, but with the advent of IBM PC and its full screen display, these semi-graphics characters were the need of the day. Keep in mind that at that time there was no graphics mode available.
The extended ASCII code is just a de facto industry standard but it is not defined by an organization like the standard ASCII. Printers, displays, and all other peripherals related to the IBM PC understand the ASCII code. If the
 

code for ‘A’ is sent to the printer, the printer will print the shape of ‘A’, if it is sent to the display, the VGA card will form the shape of ‘A’ on the CRT. If it is sent to another computer via the serial port, the other computer will understand that this is an ‘A’.
The important thing to observe in the ASCII table is the contiguous arrangement of the uppercase alphabets (41-5A), the lowercase alphabets (61-7A), and the numbers (30-39). This helps in certain operations with ASCII, for example converting the case of characters by adding or subtracting 0x20 from it. It also helps in converting a digit into its ASCII representation by adding 0x30 to it.

6.2.	DISPLAY MEMORY FORMATION 
We will explore the working of the display with ASCII codes, since it is our immediately accessible hardware. When 0x40 is sent to the VGA card, it will turn pixels on and off in such a way that a visual representation of ‘A’ appears on the screen. It has no reality, just an interpretation. In later chapters we will program the VGA controller to display a new shape when the ASCII of ‘A’ is received by it.
The video device is seen by the computer as a memory area containing the ASCII codes that are currently displayed on the screen and a set of I/O ports controlling things like the resolution, the cursor height, and the cursor position. The VGA memory is seen by the computer just like its own memory. There is no difference; rather the computer doesn’t differentiate, as it is accessible on the same bus as the system memory. Therefore if that appropriate block of the screen is cleared, the screen will be cleared. If the ASCII of ‘A’ is placed somewhere in that block, the shape of ‘A’ will appear on the screen at a corresponding place.
This correspondence must be defined as the memory is a single dimensional space while the screen is two dimensional having 80 rows and 25 columns. The memory is linearly mapped on this two dimensional space, just like a two dimensional is mapped in linear memory. There is one word per character in which a byte is needed for the ASCII code and the other byte is used for the character’s attributes discussed later. Now the first 80 words will correspond to the first row of the screen and the next 80 words will correspond to the next row. By making the memory on the video controller accessible to the processor via the system bus, the processor is now in control of what is displayed on the screen.
The three important things that we discussed are.
•	One screen location corresponds to a word in the video memory
•	The video controller memory is accessible to the processor like its own memory.
•	ASCII code of a character placed at a cell in the VGA memory will cause the corresponding ASCII shape to be displayed on the corresponding screen location.

Display Memory Base Address 
The memory at which the video controller’s memory is mapped must be a standard, so that the program can be written in a video card independent  manner. Otherwise if different vendors map their video memory at different  places in the address space, as was the problem in the start, writing software  was a headache. BIOS vendors had a problem of dealing with various card  vendors. The IBM PC text mode color display is now fixed so that system software can work uniformly. It was fixed at the physical memory location of B8000. The first byte at this location contains the ASCII for the character displayed at the top left of the video screen. Dropping the zero we can load the rest in a segment register to access the video memory. If we do something in this memory, the effect can be seen on the screen. For example we can
 

write a virus that makes any character we write drop to the bottom of the screen.

Attribute Byte 
The second byte in the word designated for one screen location holds the foreground and background colors for the character. This is called its video attribute. So the pair of the ASCII code in one byte and the attribute in the second byte makes the word that corresponds to one location on the screen. The lower address contains the code while the higher one contains the  attribute. The attribute byte as detailed below has the RGB for the  foreground and the background. It has an intensity bit for the foreground color as well thus making 16 possible colors of the foreground and 8 possible  colors for the background. When bit 7 is set the character keeps on blinking  on the screen. This bit has some more interpretations like background  intensity that has to be activated in the video controller through its I/O ports.
7	6	5	4	3	2	1	0
7 – Blinking of foreground character 
6 – Red component of background color
5 – Green component of background color  4 – Blue component of background color 
 
1 – Green component of foreground color  0 – Blue component of foreground color
Display Examples
Both DS and ES can be used to  access the video memory. However we commonly keep DS for accessing our data, and load ES with the segment of video memory. Loading a segment register with an immediate operand is not allowed in the 8088 architecture. We therefore load the segment register via a general purpose register. Other methods are loading from a memory location and a combination of push and pop.
mov ax, 0xb800 mov es, ax
This operation has opened a window to the video memory. Now the following instruction will print an ‘A’ on the top left of the screen in white color on black background.
mov word [es:0], 0x0741
The segment override is used since ES is pointing to the video memory. Since the first word is written to, the character will appear at the top left of the screen. The 41 that goes in the lower byte is the ASCII code for ‘A’. The 07 that goes in the higher byte is the attribute with I=0, R=1, G=1, B=1 for the foreground, meaning white color in low intensity and R=0, G=0, B=0 for the background meaning black color and the most significant bit cleared so that there is no blinking. Now consider the following instruction.
mov word [es:160], 0x1230
This is displayed 80 words after the start and there are 80 characters in one screen row. Therefore this is displayed on the first column of the second line. The ASCII code used is 30, which represents a ‘0’ while the attribute byte is 12 meaning green color on blue background.
We take our first example to clear the screen.

 

 
Inside the debugger the operation of clearing the screen cannot be observed since the debugger overwrites whatever is displayed on the screen. Directly executing the COM file from the command prompt*, we can see that the screen is cleared. The command prompt that reappeared is printed after the termination of our application. This is the first application that can be directly executed to see some output on the screen.

6.3.	HELLO WORLD IN ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 
  To declare a character in assembly language, we store its ASCII code in a  byte. The assembler provides us with another syntax that doesn’t forces us to  remember the ASCII code. The assembler also provides a syntax that simplifies declaration of consecutive characters, usually called a string. The three ways used below are identical in their meaning.
db	0x61, 0x62, 0x63 db	'a', 'b', 'c'
db	'abc'
When characters are stored in any high level or low level language the actual thing stored in a byte is their ASCII code. The only thing the language helps in is a simplified declaration.
Traditionally the first program in higher level languages is to print “hello world” on the screen. However due to the highly granular nature of assembly language, we are only now able to write it in assembly language. In writing this program, we make a generic routine that can print any string on the screen.

Example 6.2
01		; hello world in assembly	
02		[org 0x0100]	
03		jmp start	
04			
05		message:	db	'hello world'	; string to be printed
06		length:	dw	11	; length of the string
07			
08		; subroutine to clear the screen	
09		clrscr:	push es	
10		push ax	
11		push di	

* Remember that if this example is run in a DOS window on some newer operating systems, a full screen DOS application must be run before this program so that screen access is enabled.
 

12	
13	mov ax, 0xb800
14	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
15	mov di, 0	; point di to top left column
16	
17	nextloc:	mov word [es:di], 0x0720 ; clear next char on screen
18	add di, 2	; move to next screen location
19	cmp di, 4000	; has the whole screen cleared
20	jne nextloc	; if no clear next position
21	
22	pop di
23	pop ax
24	pop es
25	ret
26	
27	; subroutine to print a string at top left of screen
28	; takes address of string and its length as parameters
29	printstr:	push bp
30	mov bp, sp
31	push es
32	push ax
33	push cx
34	push si
35	push di
36	
37	mov ax, 0xb800
38	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
39	mov di, 0	; point di to top left column
40	mov si, [bp+6]	; point si to string
41	mov cx, [bp+4]	; load length of string in cx
42	mov ah, 0x07	; normal attribute fixed in al
43	
44	nextchar:	mov al, [si]	; load next char of string
45	mov [es:di], ax	; show this char on screen
46	add di, 2	; move to next screen location
47	add si, 1	; move to next char in string
48	loop nextchar	; repeat the operation cx times
49	
50	pop di
51	pop si
52	pop cx
53	pop ax
54	pop es
55	pop bp
56	ret 4
57	
58	start:	call clrscr	; call the clrscr subroutine
59	
60	mov ax, message
61	push ax	; push address of message
62	push word [length]	; push message length
63	call printstr	; call the printstr subroutine
64	
65	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
66	int 0x21
05-06	The string definition syntax discussed above is used to declare a
	string “hello world” of 11 bytes and the length is stored in a separate
09-25	variable.
The code to clear the screen from the last example is written in the
	form of a subroutine. Since the subroutine had no parameters, only
29-35	modified registers are saved and restored from the stack.
The standard subroutine format with parameters received via stack
37-42	and all registers saved and restored is used.
ES is initialized to point to the video memory via the AX register.
	Two pointer registers are used; SI to point to the string and DI to
	point to the top left location of the screen. CX is loaded with the
	length of the string. Normal attribute of low intensity white on black
44-45	with no blinking is loaded in the AH register.
The next character from the string is loaded into AL. Now AH holds

	the attribute and AL the ASCII code of the character. This pair is
 


46-47

48
50-56


62	written on the video memory using DI with the segment override prefix for ES to access the video memory segment.
The string pointer is incremented by one while the video memory pointer is incremented by two since one char corresponds to a word on the screen.
The loop instruction used is equivalent to a combination of “dec cx” and “jnz nextchar.” The loop is executed CX times.
The registers pushed on the stack are recovered in opposite order
	and the “ret 4” instruction removes the two parameters placed on
the stack.
	Memory can be directly pushed on the stack.	

When the program is executed, screen is cleared and the greetings is displayed on the top left of the screen. This screen location and the attribute used were hard coded in the program and can also be made variable. Then we will be able to print anywhere on the screen.

6.4.	NUMBER PRINTING IN ASSEMBLY 
Another problem related to the display is printing numbers. Every high level language allows some simple way to print numbers on the screen. As we have seen, everything on the screen is a pair of ASCII code and its attribute  and a number is a raw binary number and not a collection of ASCII codes.  For example a 10 is stored as a 10 and not as the ASCII code of 1 followed by the ASCII code of 0. If this 10 is stored in a screen location, the output will be meaningless, as the character associate to ASCII code 10 will be shown on the screen. So there is a process that converts a number in its ASCII representation. This process works for any number in any base. We will discuss our examples with respect to the decimal base and later observe the effect of changing to different bases.

Number Printing Algorithm
The key idea is to divide the number by the base number, 10 in the case of decimal. The remainder can be from 0-9 and is the right most digit of the
 
first division was 3, after second division was 5 and after the third division was 2. We have to somehow correct the order so that the actual number 253 is displayed, and the trick is to use the stack since the stack is a Last In First Out structure so if 3, 5, and 2 are pushed on it, 2, 5, and 3 will come out








DIV Instruction 
The division used in the process is integer division and not floating point division. Integer division gives an integer quotient and an integer remainder. A division algorithm is now needed. Fortunately or unfortunately there is a
 

DIV instruction available in the 8088 processor. There are two forms of the  DIV instruction. The first form divides a 32bit number in DX:AX by its 16bit  operand and stores the 16bit quotient in AX and the 16bit remainder in DX.  The second form divides a 16bit number in AX by its 8bit operand and stores  the 8bit quotient in AL and the 8bit remainder in AH. For example “DIV BL”  has an 8bit operand, so the implied dividend is 16bit and is stored in the AX  register and “DIV BX” has a 16bit operand, so the implied dividend is 32bit
 
calculator shows an –E– when the result cannot be displayed. This interrupt will be discussed later in the discussion of interrupts.
DIV (divide) performs an unsigned division of the accumulator (and its extension) by the source operand. If the source operand is a byte, it is divided into the two-byte dividend assumed to be in registers AL and AH. The byte quotient is returned in AL, and the byte remainder is returned in AH. If  the source operand is a word, it is divided into the two-word dividend in  registers AX and DX. The word quotient is returned in AX, and the word  remainder is returned in DX. If the quotient exceeds the capacity of its destination register (FF for byte source, FFFF for word source), as when division by zero is attempted, a type 0 interrupt is generated, and the quotient and remainder are undefined.
Number Printing Example
The next example introduces a subroutine that can print a number received as its only argument at the top left of the screen using the algorithm just discussed.

Example 6.3
001	; number printing algorithm
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005-022	;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;;
023	
024	; subroutine to print a number at top left of screen
025	; takes the number to be printed as its parameter
026	printnum:	push bp
027	mov bp, sp
028	push es
029	push ax
030	push bx
031	push cx
032	push dx
033	push di
034	
035	mov ax, 0xb800
036	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
037	mov ax, [bp+4]	; load number in ax
038	mov bx, 10	; use base 10 for division
039	mov cx, 0	; initialize count of digits
040	
041	nextdigit:	mov dx, 0	; zero upper half of dividend
042	div bx	; divide by 10
043	add dl, 0x30	; convert digit into ascii value
044	push dx	; save ascii value on stack
045	inc cx	; increment count of values
046	cmp ax, 0	; is the quotient zero
047	jnz nextdigit	; if no divide it again
048	
049	mov di, 0	; point di to top left column
050	
 

051	nextpos:	pop dx	; remove a digit from the stack
052		mov dh, 0x07	; use normal attribute
053		mov [es:di], dx	; print char on screen
054		add di, 2	; move to next screen location
055		loop nextpos	; repeat for all digits on stack
056			
057		pop di	
058		pop dx	
059		pop cx	
060		pop bx	
061		pop ax	
062		pop es	
063		pop bp	
064		ret 2	
065			
066	start:	call clrscr	; call the clrscr subroutine
067			
068		mov ax, 4529	
069		push ax	; place number on stack
070		call printnum	; call the printnum subroutine
071			
072		mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
073		int 0x21	
026-033	The registers are saved as an essential practice. The only parameter
	received is the number to be printed.
035-039	 ES is initialized to video memory. AX holds the  number to be
	printed. BX is the desired base, and can be loaded from a parameter.
	CX holds the number of digits pushed on the stack. This count is
	initialized to zero, incremented with every digit pushed and is used
	when the digits are popped one by one.
041-042	DX must be zeroed as our dividend is in AX	and we want a 32bit
	division. After the division AX holds the quotient and DX holds the
	remainder. Actually the remainder is only in DL since the remainder
	can be from 0 to 9.
043-045	The remainder is converted into its ASCII representation	and saved
	on the stack. The count of digits on the stack is incremented as well.
046-047	If the quotient is zero, all digits have been saved on the stack and if
	it is non-zero, we have to repeat the process to print the next digit.
049	DI is initialized to point to the top left of the screen, called the cursor
	home. If the screen location is to become a parameter, the value
	loaded in DI will change.
051-053	A digit is popped off the stack, the attribute byte is appended to it
	and it is displayed on the screen.
054-055	The next screen location is two bytes ahead so DI is incremented by
	two. The process is repeated CX times which holds the number of
	digits pushed on the stack.
057-064	We  pop  the  registers  pushed  and  “ret  2”  to  discard  the  only
	parameter on the stack.
066-070	The  main  program  clears  the  screen  and  calls  the  printnum
	subroutine to print 4529 on the top left of the screen.

When the program is executed 4529 is printed on the top left of the screen. This algorithm is versatile in that the base number can be changed and the printing will be in the desired base. For example if “mov bx, 10” is changed to “mov bx, 2” the output will be in binary as 001000110110001. Similarly changing it to “mov bx, 8” outputs the number in octal as 10661. Printing it in hexadecimal is a bit tricky, as the ASCII codes for A-F do not consecutively start after the codes for 0-9. Inside the debugger observe the working of the algorithm is just as described in the above illustration. The digits are
 

separated one by one and saved on the stack. From bottom to top, the stack holds 0034, 0035, 0032, and 0039 after the first loop is completed. The next loop pops them one by one and routes them to the screen.

6.5.	SCREEN LOCATION CALCULATION 
Until now our algorithms used a fixed attribute and displayed at a fixed screen location. We will change that to use any position on the screen and
 
For this purpose the multiplication routine written previously can be used. However we introduce an instruction of the 8088 microprocessor at this time that can multiply 8bit or 16bit numbers.
MUL Instruction 
 MUL (multiply) performs an unsigned multiplication of the source operand  and the accumulator. If the source operand is a byte, then it is multiplied by  register AL and the double-length result is returned in AH and AL. If the source operand is a word, then it is multiplied by register AX,  and the double-length result is returned in registers DX and AX.

String Printing at Desired Location
We modify the string printing program to take the x-position, the y- position, and the attribute as parameters. The desired location on the screen can be calculated with the following formulae.
location = ( hypos * 80 + epos ) * 2

Example 6.4
01	; hello world at desired screen location
02	[org 0x0100]
03	jmp start
04	
05	message:	db	'hello world'	; string to be printed
06	length:	dw	11	; length of the string
07	
08-25	;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;;
26	
27	; subroutine to print a string at top left of screen
28	; takes x position, y position, string attribute, address of string
29	; and its length as parameters
30	printstr:	push bp
31	mov bp, sp
32	push es
33	push ax
34	push cx
35	push si
36	push di
37	
38	mov ax, 0xb800
39	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
40	mov al, 80	; load al with columns per row
41	mull byte [bp+10]	; multiply with y position
42	add ax, [bp+12]	; add x position
43	shl ax, 1	; turn into byte offset
44	mov dial	; point di to required location
45	mov si, [bp+6]	; point si to string
46	mov cx, [bp+4]	; load length of string in cx
47	mov ah, [bp+8]	; load attribute in ah
48	
49	nextchar:	mov al, [si]	; load next char of string
50	mov [es:di], ax	; show this char on screen
51	add di, 2	; move to next screen location
 

52		add	si, 1	;	move to next char in string
53		loop	nextchar	;	repeat the operation cx times
54					
55		pop	di		
56		pop	si		
57		pop	cx		
58		pop	ax		
59		pop	es		
60		pop	bp		
61		ret	10		
62					
63	start:	call	clrscr	;	call the clrscr subroutine
64					
65		mov	ax, 30		
66		push	ax	;	push x position
67		mov	ax, 20		
68		push	ax	;	push y position
69		mov	ax, 1	;	blue on black attribute
70		push	ax	;	push attribute
71		mov	ax, message		
72		push	ax	;	push address of message
73		push	word [length]	;	push message length
74		call	printstr	;	call the printstr subroutine
75					
76		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
77		int	0x21		












When the program is executed hello world is displayed at the desired screen location in the desired color. The x-position, y-position, and attribute parameters can be changed and their effect be seen on the screen. The



EXERCISES
1.	Replace the following valid instruction with a single instruction that has the same effect. Don’t consider the effect on flags.
dec cx jnz L3
2.	Write an infinite loop that shows two asterisks moving from right and left centers of the screen to the middle and then back. Use two empty nested loops with large counters to introduce some delay so that the movement is noticeable.
3.	Write a function “printaddr” that takes two parameters, the segment and offset parts of an address, via the stack. The function should print the physical address corresponding to the segment offset pair passed at the top left of the screen. The address should be printed in hex and will therefore occupy exactly five columns. For example, passing 5600 and 7800 as parameters should result in 5D800 printed at the top left of the screen.
4.	Write code that treats an array of 500 bytes as one of 4000 bits and for each blank position on the screen (i.e. space) sets the corresponding bit to zero and the rest to one.
 

5.	Write a function “drawrect” that takes four parameters via the stack. The parameters are top, left, bottom, and right in this order. The function should display a rectangle on the screen using the characters + - and |.
 

 
7
String Instructions

7.1.	STRING PROCESSING
Till now  very simple instructions of the 8088 microprocessor  have been introduced. In this chapter we will discuss a bit more powerful instructions that can process blocks of data in one go. They are called block processing or string instructions. This is the appropriate place to discuss these instructions as we have just introduced a block of memory, which is the video memory. The vision of this memory for the processor is just a block of memory starting at a special address. For example the clear screen operation initializes this whole block to 0720. 
There are just 5 block processing instructions in 8088. In the primitive form, the instructions themselves operate on a single cell of memory at one time. However a special prefix repeats the instruction in hardware called the REP prefix. The REP prefix allows these instructions to operate on a number of data elements in one instruction. This is not like a loop; rather this repetition is hard coded in the processor. The  five instructions are STOS, LODS, CMPS, SCAS, and MOVS called store  string, load string, compare string, scan string, and move string respectively. MOVS is the  instruction that allows memory to memory moves, as was discussed in the exceptions to the memory to memory movement rules. String instructions are complex instruction in that they perform a number of tasks against one instruction. And with the REP prefix they perform the task of a complex loop in one  instruction. This causes drastic speed improvements in operations on large  blocks of memory. The reduction in code size and the improvement in speed  are the  two reasons why these instructions were introduced in  the 8088 processor.
There are a number of common things in these instructions. Firstly they all work on a block of data. DI and SI are used to access memory. SI and DI are called source index and destination index because of string instructions. Whenever an instruction needs a memory source, DS:SI holds the pointer to it. An override is possible that can change the association from DS but the default is DS. Whenever a string instruction needs a memory destination, ES:DI holds the pointer to it. No override is possible in this case. Whenever a byte register is needed, AL holds the value. Whenever a word register is used AX holds the value. For example STOS stores a register in memory so AL or AX is the register used and ES:DI points to the destination. The LODS instruction loads from memory to register so the source is pointed to by DS:SI and the register used is AL or AX.
String instructions work on a block of data. A block has a start  and an end. The instructions can work from the start towards the end and from the end towards the start. In fact they can work in both directions, and they must be allowed to work in both directions otherwise certain operations with overlapping blocks become impossible. This problem is discussed in detail later. The direction of movement is controlled with the Direction Flag (DF) in the flags register. If this flag is cleared the direction is from lower addresses  towards higher addresses and if this flag is set the direction is from higher addresses to lower addresses. If DF is cleared, this is called the auto- increment mode of string instruction, and if DF is set, this is called the auto- decrement mode. There are two instructions to set and clear the direction flag.
 

cld 	; clear direction flag std	; set direction flag 
Every string instruction has two variants; a byte variant and a word variant. For example the two variants of STOS are  STOSB and STOSW.  Similarly the variants for the other string instructions are attained by appending a B or a W to the instruction name. The operation of each of the string instructions and each of the repetition prefixes is discussed below.

STOS
STOS transfers a byte or word from register AL or AX to the string element addressed by ES:DI and updates DI to point to the next location. STOS is often used to clear a block of memory or fill it with a constant.
The implied source will always be in AL or AX. If DF is clear, DI will be incremented by one or two depending of whether STOSB or STOSW is used. If DF is set DI will be decremented by one or two  depending of whether STOSB or STOSW is used. If REP is used before this instruction, the process will be repeated CX times. CX is called the counter register because of the special treatment given to it in the LOOP and JCXZ instructions and the REP set of prefixes. So if REP is used with STOS the whole block of memory will be filled with a constant value. REP will always decrement CX like the LOOP instruction and this cannot be changed with the direction flag. It is also independent of whether the byte or the word variant is used. It always decrements by one; therefore CX has count of repetitions and not the count of bytes.

LODS 
LODS transfers a byte or word from the source location DS:SI to AL or AX  and updates SI to point to the next location. LODS is generally used in a loop and not with the REP prefix since the value previously loaded in the register is overwritten if the instruction is repeated and only the last value of the block remains in the register.

SCAS 
SCAS compares a source byte or word in register AL or AX with the destination string element addressed by ES:DI and updates the flags. DI is updated to point to the next location. SCAS is often used to locate equality or in-equality in a string through the use of an appropriate prefix.
SCAS is a bit different from the other instructions. This is more like the CMP instruction in that it does subtraction of its operands. The prefixes REPE (repeat while equal) and REPNE (repeat while not equal) are used with this instruction. The instruction is used to locate a byte in AL in the block of memory. When the first equality or inequality is encountered; both have uses. For example this instruction can be used to search for a 0 in a null terminated string to calculate the length of the string. In this form REPNE will be used to repeat while the null is not there.

MOVS
MOVS transfers a byte or word from the source  location DS:SI to the destination ES:DI and updates SI and DI to point to the next locations. MOVS is used to move a block of memory. The DF is important in the case of overlapping blocks. For example when the source and destination blocks overlap and the source is below the destination copy must be done upwards while if the destination is below the source copy must be done downwards. We cannot perform both these copy operations properly if the direction flag was not provided. If the source is below the destination and an upwards copy is used the source to be copied is destroyed. If however the copy is done downwards the portion of source destroyed is the one that has already been
 

copied. Therefore we need the control of the direction flag to handle this problem. This problem is further detailed in a later example.

CMPS
CMPS subtracts the source location DS:SI from the destination location ES:DI. Source and Destination are unaffected. SI and DI are updated accordingly. CMPS compares two blocks of memory for equality or inequality of the block. It subtracts byte by byte or word by word. If used with a REPE or a REPNE prefix is repeats as long as the blocks are same or as long as they are different. For example it can be used for find a substring. A substring is a string that is contained in another string. For example “has” is contained in “Mary has a little lamp.” Using CMPS we can do the operation of a complex loop in a single instruction. Only the REPE and REPNE prefixes are meaningful with this instruction.

REP Prefix
REP repeats the following string instruction CX times. The use of CX is implied with the REP prefix. The decrement in CX doesn’t affect any flags and the jump is also independent of the flags, just like JCXZ.

REPE and REPNE Prefixes
REPE or REPZ repeat the following string instruction while the zero flag is set and REPNE or REPNZ repeat the following instruction while the zero flag is not set. REPE or REPNE are used with the SCAS or CMPS instructions. The other string instructions have nothing to do with the condition since they are performing no comparison. Also the initial state of flags before the string instruction does not affect the operation. The most complex operation of the string instruction is with these prefixes.

7.2.	STOS EXAMPLE – CLEARING THE SCREEN
We take the example of clearing the screen and observe that how simple and fast this operation is with the string instructions. Even if there are three instructions in a loop they have to be fetched and decoded with every iteration and the time of three instructions is multiplied by the number of iterations of the loop. In the case of string instructions, many operations are short circuited. The instruction is fetched and decoded once and only the execution is repeated CX times. That is why string instructions are so efficient in their operation. The program to clear the screen places 0720 on the 2000 words on the screen.

Example 7.1
001	; clear screen using string instructions
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; subroutine to clear the screen
006	clrscr:	push es
007	push ax
008	push cx
009	push di
010	
011	mov ax, 0xb800
012	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
013	xor di, di	; point di to top left column
014	mov ax, 0x0720	; space char in normal attribute
015	mov cx, 2000	; number of screen locations
016	
017	cld	; auto increment mode
018	rep stosw	; clear the whole screen
019	
020	pop di
 

021		pop	cx	
022		pop	ax	
023		pop	es	
024		ret		
025				
026	start:	call	clrscr	; call clrscr subroutine
027				
028		mov	ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
029		int	0x21	
013	A space efficient way to zero a 16bit register is to XOR it with itself. Remember that exclusive or results in a zero whenever the bits at the source and at the destination are same. This instruction takes just two bytes compared to “mov di, 0” which would take three. This is a standard way to zero a 16bit register.
Inside the debugger the operation of the string instruction can be monitored. The trace into command can be used to monitor every repetition of the string instruction. However screen will not be cleared inside the debugger as the debugger overwrites its display on the screen so CX decrements with every iteration, DI increments by 2. The first access is made at B800:0000 and the second at B800:0002 and so on. A complex and inefficient loop is replaced with a fast and simple instruction that does the same operation many times faster.

7.3.	LODS EXAMPLE – STRING PRINTING
The use of LODS with the REP prefix is not meaningful as only the last value loaded will remain in the register. It is normally used in a loop paired with a STOS instruction to do some block processing. We use LODS to pick the data, do the processing, and then use STOS to put it back or at some other place. For example in string printing, we will use LODS to read a character of the string, attach the attribute byte to it, and use STOS to write it on the video memory.
The following example will print the string using string instructions.

Example 7.2
001	; hello world printing using string instructions
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	message:	db	'hello world'	; string to be printed
006	length:	dw	11	; length of string
007	
008-027	;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;;
028	
029	; subroutine to print a string
030	; takes the x position, y position, attribute, address of string and
031	; its length as parameters
032	printstr:	push bp
033	mov bp, sp
034	push es
035	push ax
036	push cx
037	push si
038	push di
039	
040	mov ax, 0xb800
041	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
042	mov al, 80	; load al with columns per row
043	mul byte [bp+10]	; multiply with y position
044	add ax, [bp+12]	; add x position
045	shl ax, 1	; turn into byte offset
046	mov di,ax	; point di to required location
047	mov si, [bp+6]	; point si to string
048	mov cx, [bp+4]	; load length of string in cx
049	mov ah, [bp+8]	; load attribute in ah
 

050					
051		cld		;	auto increment mode
052	nextchar:	lodsb		;	load next char in al
053		stosw		;	print char/attribute pair
054		loop	nextchar	;	repeat for the whole string
055					
056		pop	di		
057		pop	si		
058		pop	cx		
059		pop	ax		
060		pop	es		
061		pop	bp		
062		ret	10		
063					
064	start:	call	clrscr	;	call the clrscr subroutine
065					
066		mov	ax, 30		
067		push	ax	;	push x position
068		mov	ax, 20		
069		push	ax	;	push y position
070		mov	ax, 1	;	blue on black attribute
071		push	ax	;	push attribute
072		mov	ax, message		
073		push	ax	;	push address of message
074		push	word [length]	;	push message length
075		call	printstr	;	call the printstr subroutine
076					
077		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
078		int	0x21		
051	Both operations are in auto increment mode.
052-053	DS is automatically initialized to our segment. ES points to video
	memory. SI points to the address of our string. DI points to the
	screen location. AH holds the attribute. Whenever we read a
	character from the string in AL, the attribute byte is implicitly
	attached and the pair is present in AX. The same effect could not be
	achieved with a REP prefix as the REP will repeat LODS and then
	start repeating STOS, but we need to alternate them.
054	CX holds the length of the string. Therefore LOOP repeats for each
	character of the string.

Inside the debugger we observe how LODS and STOS alternate and CX is only used by the LOOP instruction. In the original code there were four instructions inside the loop; now there are only two. This is how string instructions help in reducing code size.

7.4.	SCAS EXAMPLE – STRING LENGTH 
Many higher level languages do not explicitly store string length; rather they use a null character, a character with an ASCII code of zero, to signal the end of a string. In assembly language programs, it is also easier to store a zero at the end of the string, instead of calculating the length of string, which is very difficult process for longer strings. So we delegate length calculation to the processor and modify our string printing subroutine to take a null terminated string and no length. We use SCASB with REPNE and a zero in AL to find a zero byte in the string. In CX we load the maximum possible size, which is 64K bytes. However actual strings will be much smaller. An important thing regarding SCAS and CMPS is that if they stop due to equality or inequality, the index registers have already incremented. Therefore when SCAS will stop DI would be pointing past the null character.

Example 7.3
001	; hello world printing with a null terminated string
002	[org 0x0100]
 

003
004
005
006
007-026
027
028
029
030
031
032
033
034
035
036
037
038
039
040
041
042
043
044
045
046
047
048
049
050
051
052
053
054
055
056
057
058
059
060
061
062
063
064
065
066
067
068
069
070
071
072
073
074
075
076
077
078
079
080
081
082
083
084
085
086	jmp start
message:	db	'hello world', 0	; null terminated string
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;;
; subroutine to print a string
; takes the x position, y position, attribute, and address of a null
; terminated string as parameters printstr:	push bp
mov bp, sp push es push ax push cx push si push di
push ds
pop es	; load ds in es
mov di, [bp+4]	; point di to string
mov cx, 0xffff	; load maximum number in cx xor al, al	; load a zero in al
repne scasb	; find zero in the string mov ax, 0xffff	; load maximum number in ax sub ax, cx	; find change in cx
dec ax	; exclude null from length
jz	exit	; no printing if string is empty
mov cx, ax	; load string length in cx mov ax, 0xb800
mov es, ax	; point es to video base
mov al, 80	; load al with columns per row mul byte [bp+8]	; multiply with y position add ax, [bp+10]	; add x position
shl ax, 1	; turn into byte offset
mov di,ax	; point di to required location
mov si, [bp+4]	; point si to string mov ah, [bp+6]	; load attribute in ah
cld	; auto increment mode
nextchar:	lodsb	; load next char in al stosw	; print char/attribute pair
loop nextchar	; repeat for the whole string
exit:	pop di pop si
pop cx
pop ax
pop es
pop bp
ret 8
start:	call clrscr	; call the clrscr subroutine mov ax, 30
push ax	; push x position mov ax, 20
push ax	; push y position
mov ax, 1	; blue on black attribute
push ax	; push attribute mov ax, message
push ax	; push address of message
call printstr	; call the printstr subroutine
mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program int 0x21
039-040	Another way to load a segment register is to use a combination of push and pop. The processor doesn’t match pushes and pops. ES is equalized to DS in this pair of instructions.
Inside the debugger observe the working of the code for length calculation after SCASB has completed its operation.
 

LES and LDS Instructions
Since the string instructions need their source and destination in the form of a segment offset pair, there are two special instructions that load a segment register  and a general purpose register from two consecutive memory locations. LES loads ES while LDS loads DS. Both these instructions have two parameters, one is the general purpose register to be loaded and the other is the memory location from which to load these registers. The major application of these instructions is when a subroutine receives a segment offset pair as an argument and the pair is to be loaded in a segment and an offset register. According to Intel rules of significance the word at  higher address is loaded in the segment register while the word at lower  address is loaded in the offset register. As parameters segment should be pushed first so that it ends up at a higher address and the offset should be pushed afterwards. When loading the lower address will be given. For example “lds si, [bp+4]” will load SI from BP+4 and DS from BP+6.

7.5.	LES AND LDS EXAMPLE
We modify the string length calculation subroutine to take the segment and offset of the string and use the LES instruction to load that segment offset pair in ES and DI.

Example 7.4
001	; hello world printing with length calculation subroutine
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	message:	db	'hello world', 0	; null terminated string
006	
007-026	;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;;
027	
028	; subroutine to calculate the length of a string
029	; takes the segment and offset of a string as parameters
030	strlen:	push bp
031	mov bp,sp
032	push es
033	push cx
034	push di
035	
036	les di, [bp+4]	; point es:di to string
037	mov cx, 0xffff	; load maximum number in cx
038	xor al, al	; load a zero in al
039	repne scasb	; find zero in the string
040	mov ax, 0xffff	; load maximum number in ax
041	sub ax, cx	; find change in cx
042	dec ax	; exclude null from length
043	
044	pop di
045	pop cx
046	pop es
047	pop bp
048	ret 4
049	
050	; subroutine to print a string
051	; takes the x position, y position, attribute, and address of a null
052	; terminated string as parameters
053	printstr:	push bp
054	mov bp, sp
055	push es
056	push ax
057	push cx
058	push si
059	push di
060	
061	push ds	; push segment of string
062	mov ax, [bp+4]
063	push ax	; push offset of string
064	call strlen	; calculate string length
 

065		cmp ax, 0	;	is the string empty
066		jz	exit	;	no printing if string is empty
067		mov cx, ax	;	save length in cx
068				
069		mov ax, 0xb800		
070		mov es, ax	;	point es to video base
071		mov al, 80	;	load al with columns per row
072		mul byte [bp+8]	;	multiply with y position
073		add ax, [bp+10]	;	add x position
074		shl ax, 1	;	turn into byte offset
075		mov di,ax	;	point di to required location
076		mov si, [bp+4]	;	point si to string
077		mov ah, [bp+6]	;	load attribute in ah
078				
079		cld	;	auto increment mode
080	nextchar:	lodsb	;	load next char in al
081		stosw	;	print char/attribute pair
082		loop nextchar	;	repeat for the whole string
083				
084	exit:	pop di		
085		pop si		
086		pop cx		
087		pop ax		
088		pop es		
089		pop bp		
090		ret 8		
091				
092	start:	call clrscr	;	call the clrscr subroutine
093				
094		mov ax, 30		
095		push ax	;	push x position
096		mov ax, 20		
097		push ax	;	push y position
098		mov ax, 0x71	;	blue on white attribute
099		push ax	;	push attribute
100		mov ax, message		
101		push ax	;	push address of message
102		call printstr	;	call the printstr subroutine
103				
104		mov ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
105		int 0x21		
036	The LES instruction is used to load the DI register from BP+4 and

	the ES register from BP+6.
065	The convention to return a value from a subroutine is to use the AX 
	register. That is why AX is not saved and restored in the subroutine. 

Inside the debugger observe that the segment register is pushed followed by the offset. The higher address FFE6 contains the segment and the lower address FFE4 contains the offset. This is because we have a decrementing stack. Then observe the loading of ES and DI from the stack.

7.6.	MOVS EXAMPLE – SCREEN SCROLLING
MOVS has the two forms MOVSB and MOVSW. REP allows the instruction to be repeated CX times allowing blocks of memory to be copied. We will perform this copy of the video screen.
Scrolling is the process when all the lines on the screen move one or more lines towards the top of towards the bottom and the new line that appears on the top or the bottom is cleared. Scrolling is a process on which string
 
In this example we want to scroll a variable number of lines given as argument. Therefore we have to calculate the source address, which is 160 times the number of lines to clear. The destination address is 0, which is the top left of the screen. The lines that scroll up are discarded so the source pointer is placed after them. An equal number of lines at the bottom are cleared. These lines have actually been copied above.
 


Example 7.5
001	; scroll up the screen
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; subroutine to scroll up the screen
006	; take the number of lines to scroll as parameter
007	scrollup:	push bp
008	mov bp,sp
009	push ax
010	push cx
011	push si
012	push di
013	push es
014	push ds
015	
016	mov ax, 80	; load chars per row in ax
017	mul byte [bp+4]	; calculate source position
018	mov si, ax	; load source position in si
019	push si	; save position for later use
020	shl si, 1	; convert to byte offset
021	mov cx, 2000	; number of screen locations
022	sub cx, ax	; count of words to move
023	mov ax, 0xb800
024	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
025	mov ds, ax	; point ds to video base
026	xor di, di	; point di to top left column
027	cld	; set auto increment mode
028	rep movsw	; scroll up
029	mov ax, 0x0720	; space in normal attribute
030	pop cx	; count of positions to clear
031	rep stosw	; clear the scrolled space
032	
033	pop ds
034	pop es
035	pop di
036	pop si
037	pop cx
038	pop ax
039	pop bp
040	ret 2
041	
042	start:	mov ax,5
043	push ax	; push number of lines to scroll
044	call scrollup	; call the scroll up subroutine
045	
046	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
047	int 0x21

The beauty of this example is that the two memory blocks are overlapping. If the source and destination in the above algorithm are swapped in an expectation to scroll down the result is strange. For example if 5 lines were to scroll down, the top five lines of the screen are repeated on the whole screen. This is where the use of the direction flag comes in.
When the source is five lines below the destination, the first five lines are copied on the first five lines of the destination. However the next five lines to be copied from the source have been destroyed in the process; because they were the same as the first five lines of the destination. The same is the problem with every set of five lines as the source is destroyed during the previous copy. In this situation we must go from bottom of the screen towards the top. Now the last five lines are copied to the last five lines of the destination. The next five lines are copied to next five lines of the destination destroying the last five lines of source; but now these lines are no longer needed and have been previously copied. Therefore the copy will be appropriately done in this case.
We give an example of scrolling down with this consideration. Now we have to calculate the end of the block instead of the start.
 

Example 7.6
001	; scroll down the screen
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; subroutine to scrolls down the screen
006	; take the number of lines to scroll as parameter
007	scrolldown:	push bp
008	mov bp,sp
009	push ax
010	push cx
011	push si
012	push di
013	push es
014	push ds
015	
016	mov ax, 80	; load chars per row in ax
017	mul byte [bp+4]	; calculate source position
018	push ax	; save position for later use
019	shl ax, 1	; convert to byte offset
020	mov si, 3998	; last location on the screen
021	sub si, ax	; load source position in si
022	mov cx, 2000	; number of screen locations
023	sub cx, ax	; count of words to move
024	mov ax, 0xb800
025	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
026	mov ds, ax	; point ds to video base
027	mov di, 3998	; point di to lower right column
028	std	; set auto decrement mode
029	rep movsw	; scroll up
030	mov ax, 0x0720	; space in normal attribute
031	pop cx	; count of positions to clear
032	rep stosw	; clear the scrolled space
033	
034	pop ds
035	pop es
036	pop di
037	pop si
038	pop cx
039	pop ax
040	pop bp
041	ret 2
042	
043	start:	mov ax,5
044	push ax	; push number of lines to scroll
045	call scrolldown	; call scroll down subroutine
046	
047	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
048	int 0x21

7.7.	CMPS EXAMPLE – STRING COMPARISON
For the last string instruction, we take string comparison as an example. The subroutine will take two segment offset pairs containing the address of the two null terminated strings. The subroutine will return 0 if the strings are different and 1 if they are same. The AX register will be used to hold the return value.

Example 7.7
001	; comparing null terminated strings
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	msg1:	db	'hello world', 0
006	msg2:	db	'hello WORLD', 0
007	msg3:	db	'hello world', 0
008	
009-031	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-050 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (strlen) ;;;;;
032	
033	; subroutine to compare two strings
034	; takes segment and offset pairs of two strings to compare
 

035	; returns 1 in ax if they match and 0 other wise
036	strcmp:	push bp
037	mov bp,sp
038	push cx
039	push si
040	push di
041	push es
042	push ds
043	
044	lds si, [bp+4]	; point ds:si to first string
045	les di, [bp+8]	; point es:di to second string
046	
047	push ds	; push segment of first string
048	push si	; push offset of first string
049	call strlen	; calculate string length
050	mov cx, ax	; save length in cx
051	
052	push es	; push segment of second string
053	push di	; push offset of second string
054	call strlen	; calculate string length
055	cmp cx, ax	; compare length of both strings
056	jne exitfalse	; return 0 if they are unequal
057	
058	mov ax, 1	; store 1 in ax to be returned
059	repe cmpsb	; compare both strings
060	jcxz exitsimple	; are they successfully compared
061	
062	exitfalse:	mov ax, 0	; store 0 to mark unequal
063	
064	exitsimple:	pop ds
065	pop es
066	pop di
067	pop si
068	pop cx
069	pop bp
070	ret 8
071	
072	start:	push ds	; push segment of first string
073	mov ax, msg1
074	push ax	; push offset of first string
075	push ds	; push segment of second string
076	mov ax, msg2
077	push ax	; push offset of second string
078	call strcmp	; call strcmp subroutine
079	
080	push ds	; push segment of first string
081	mov ax, msg1
082	push ax	; push offset of first string
083	push ds	; push segment of third string
084	mov ax, msg3
085	push ax	; push offset of third string
086	call strcmp	; call strcmp subroutine
087	
088	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
089	int 0x21
005-007	Three strings are declared out of which two are equal and one is
	different.
044-045	LDS and LES are used to load the pointers to the two strings in
	DS:SI and ES:DI.
070	Since there are 4 parameters to the subroutine “ret 8” is used.

Inside the debugger we observe that REPE is shown as REP. This is because REP and REPE are represented with the same prefix byte. When used with STOS, LODS, and MOVS it functions as REP and when used with SCAS and CMPS it functions as REPE.

EXERCISES
1.	Write code to find the byte in AL in the whole megabyte of memory such that each memory location is compared to AL only once.
 

2.	Write a far procedure to reverse an array of 64k words such that the first element becomes the last and the last becomes the first and so on. For example if the first word contained 0102h, this value is swapped with the last word. The next word is swapped with the second last word and so on. The routine will be passed two parameters through the stack; the segment and offset of the first element of the array.
3.	Write a near procedure to copy a given area on the screen at the center of the screen without using a temporary array. The routine will be passed top, left, bottom, and right in that order through the stack. The parameters passed will always be within range the height will be odd and the width will be even so that it can be exactly centered.
4.	Write code to find two segments in the whole memory that are exactly the same. In other words find two distinct values which if loaded in ES and DS then for every value of SI [DS:SI]=[ES:SI].
5.	Write a function writechar that takes two parameters. The first parameter is the character to write and the second is the address of a memory area containing top, left, bottom, right, current row, current column, normal attribute, and cursor attribute in 8 consecutive bytes. These define a virtual window on the screen.
The function writes the passed character at (current row, current column) using the normal attribute. It then increments current column, If current column goes outside the window, it makes it zero and increments current row. If current row gets out of window, it scrolls the window one line up, and blanks out the new line in the window. In the end, it sets the attribute of the new (current row, current column) to cursor attribute.
6.	Write a function “strcpy” that takes the address of two parameters via stack, the one pushed first is source and the second is the destination. The function should copy the source on the destination including the null character assuming that sufficient space is reserved starting at destination.
 
8
Software Interrupts

8.1.	INTERRUPTS
Interrupts in reality are events that occurred outside the processor and the processor must be informed about them. Interrupts are asynchronous and unpredictable. Asynchronous means that the interrupts occur, independent of the working of the processor, i.e. independent of the instruction currently executing. Synchronous events are those that occur side by side with another activity. Interrupts must be asynchronous as they are generated by the external world which is unaware of the happenings inside the processor. True interrupts that occur in real time are asynchronous with the execution. Also it is unpredictable at which time an interrupt will come. The two concepts of being unpredictable and asynchronous are overlapping. Unpredictable means the time at which an interrupt will come cannot be predicted, while asynchronous means that the interrupt has nothing to do with the currently executing instruction and the current state of the processor.
The 8088 processor divides interrupts into two classes. Software interrupts and hardware interrupts. Hardware interrupts are the real interrupts generated by the external world as discussed above. Software interrupts on the contrary are not generated from outside the processor. They just provide an extended far call mechanism. Far call allows us to jump anywhere in the whole megabyte of memory. To return from the target we place both the segment and offset on the stack. Software interrupts show a similar behavior. It however pushes one more thing before both the segment and offset and that is the FLAGS register. Just like the far call loads new values in CS and IP, the interrupt call loads new values in CS, IP, and FLAGS. Therefore the only way to retain the value of original FLAGS register is to push and pop as part of interrupt call and return instructions. Pushing and popping inside the routine will not work as the routine started with an already tampered value.
The discussion of real time interrupts is deferred till the next chapter. They play the critical part in control applications where external hardware must be control and events and changes therein must be appropriately responded by the processor. To generate an interrupt the INT instruction is used. The routine that executes in response to an INT instruction is called the interrupt service routine (ISR) or the interrupt handler. Taking example from real time interrupts the routine to instruct an external hardware to close the valve of a boiler in response to an interrupt from the pressure sensor is an interrupt routine.
The software interrupt mechanism in 8088 uses vectored interrupts meaning that the address of the interrupt routine is not directly mentioned in an interrupt call, rather the address is lookup up from a table. 8088 provides a mechanism for mapping interrupts to interrupt handlers. Introducing a new entry in this mapping table is called hooking an interrupt.
Syntax of the INT instruction is very simple. It takes a single byte argument varying from 0-255. This is the interrupt number informing the processor, which interrupt is currently of interest. This number correlates to the interrupt handler routine by a routing or vectoring mechanism. A few interrupt numbers in the start are reserved and we generally do not use them. They are related to the processor working. For example INT 0 is the
 

divide by zero interrupt. A list of all reserved interrupts is given later. Such interrupts are programmed in the hardware to generate the designated interrupt when the specified condition arises. The remaining interrupts are provided by the processor for our use. Some of these were reserved by the IBM PC designers to interface user programs with system software like DOS and BIOS. This was the logical choice for them as interrupts provided a very flexible architecture. The remaining interrupts are totally free for use in user software.
The correlation process from the interrupt number to the interrupt handler uses a table called interrupt vector table. Its location is fixed to physical memory address zero. Each entry of the table is four bytes long containing the segment and offset of the interrupt routine for the corresponding interrupt number. The first two bytes in the entry contain the offset and the next two bytes contain the segment. The little endian rule of putting the more significant part (segment) at a higher address is seen here as well. Mathematically offset of the interrupt n will be at nx4 while the segment will be at nx4+2. One entry in this table is called a vector. If the vector is changed for interrupt 0 then INT 0 will take execution to the new handler whose address is now placed at those four bytes. INT 1 vector occupies location 4, 5, 6, and 7 and similarly vector for INT 2 occupies locations 8, 9, 10, and 11. As the table is located in RAM it can be changed anytime. Immediately after changing it the interrupt mapping is changed and now the interrupt will result in execution of the new routine. This indirection gives the mechanism extreme flexibility.
The operation of interrupt is same whether it is the result of an INT instruction (software interrupt) or it is generated by an external hardware which passes the interrupt number by a different mechanism. The currently executing instruction is completed, the current value of FLAGS is pushed on the stack, then the current code segment is pushed, then the offset of the next instruction is pushed. After this it automatically clears the trap flag and the interrupt flag to disallow further interrupts until the current routine finishes. After this it loads the word at nx4 in IP and the word at nx4+2 in CS if interrupt n was generated. As soon as these values are loaded in CS and IP execution goes to the start of the interrupt handler. When the handler finishes its work it uses the IRET instruction to return to the caller. IRET pops IP, then CS, and then FLAGS. The original value of IF and TF is restored which re-enables further interrupts. IF and TF will be discussed in detail in the discussion of real time interrupts. We have discussed three things till now.
1.	The INT and IRET instruction format and syntax
2.	The formation of IVT (interrupt vector table)
3.	Operation of the processor when an interrupt in generated
Just as discussed in the subroutines chapter, the processor will not match interrupt calls to interrupt returns. If a RETF is used in the end of an ISR the processor will still return to the caller but the FLAGS will remain on the stack which will destroy the expectations of the caller with the stack. If we know what we are doing we may use such different combination of instructions. Generally we will use IRET to return from an interrupt routine. Apart from indirection the software interrupt mechanism is similar to CALL and RET. Indirection is the major difference.
The operation of INT can be written as:
•	sp ← sp-2
•	[sp] ← flag
•	sp ← sp-2
•	if ← 0
•	tf ← 0
•	[sp] ← cs
•	sp ← sp-2
•	[sp] ← ip
 

•	ip ← [0:N*4]
•	cs ← [0:N*4+2]
The operation of IRET can be written as:
•	ip ← [sp]
•	sp ← sp+2
•	cs ← [sp]
•	sp ← sp+2
•	flag ← [sp]
•	sp ← sp+2
The above is the microcode description of INT and IRET. To obey an assembly language instruction the processor breaks it down into small operations. By reading the microcode of an instruction its working can be completely understood.
The interrupt mechanism  we have studied is an extended far call mechanism. It pushes FLAGS in addition to CS and IP and it loads CS and IP with a special mechanism of indirection. It is just like the table of contents that is located at a fixed position and allows going directly to chapter 3, to chapter 4 etc. If this association is changed in the table of contents the direction of the reader changes. For example if Chapter 2 starts at page 220 while 240 is written in the table of contents, the reader will go to page 240 and not 220. The table of contents entry is a vector to point to map the chapter number to page number. IVT has 256 chapters  and the interrupt  mechanism looks up the appropriate chapter number to reach the desired page to find the interrupt routine.
Another important similarity is that table of contents is always placed at the start of the book, a well known place. Its physical position is fixed. If some publishers put it at some place, others at another place, the reader will be unable to find the desired chapter. Similarly in 8088 the physical memory address zero is fixed for the IVT and it occupies exactly a kilobyte of memory as the 256x4=1K where 256 is the number of possible interrupt vectors while the size of one vector is 4 bytes.
Interrupts introduce temporary breakage in the program flow, sometimes programmed (software interrupts) and un-programmed at other times (hardware interrupts). By hooking interrupts various system functionalities can be controlled. The interrupts reserved by the processor and having special functions in 8088 are listed below:
•	INT 0, Division by zero 
Meaning the quotient did not fit in the destination register. This is a bit different as this interrupt does not return to the next instruction, rather it returns to the same instruction that generated it, a DIV instruction of course. Here INT 0 is automatically generated by a DIV when a specific situation arises, there is no INT 0 instruction.
•	INT 1, Trap, Single step Interrupt 
This interrupt is used in debugging with the trap flag. If the trap flag is set the Single Step Interrupt is generated after every instruction. By hooking this interrupt a debugger can get control after every instruction and display the registers etc. 8088 was the first processor that has this ability to support debugging.
•	INT 2, NMI-Non Maskable Interrupt 
Real interrupts come from outside the processor. INT 0 is not real as it is generated from inside. For real interrupts there are two pins in the processor, the INT pin and the NMI pin. The processor can be directed to listen or not to listen to the INT pin. Consider a recording studio, when the recording is going on, doors are closed so that no interruption occurs, and when there is a break, the doors are opened so that if someone is waiting outside can come it. However if there is an urgency like fire outside then the door must be broken and the recording must not be catered for. For such situations is the NMI pin
 

which informs about fatal hardware failures in the system and is tied to interrupt 2. INT pin can be masked but NMI cannot be masked.
•	INT 3, Debug Interrupt
The only special thing about this interrupt is that it has a single byte opcode and not a two byte combination where the second byte tells the interrupt number. This allows it to replace any instruction whatsoever. It is also used by the debugger and will be discussed in detail with the debugger working.
•	INT 4, Arithmetic Overflow, change of sign bit
The overflow flag is set if the sign bit unexpectedly changes as a result of a mathematical or logical instruction. However the overflow flag signals a real overflow only if the numbers in question are treated as signed numbers. So this interrupt is not automatically generated but as a result of a special instruction INTO (interrupt on overflow) if the  overflow flag is set. Otherwise the INTO instruction behaves like a NOP  (no operation).
These are the five interrupts reserved by Intel and are generally not used in our operations.

8.2.	HOOKING AN INTERRUPT 
To hook an interrupt we change the vector corresponding to that interrupt. As soon as the interrupt vector changes, that interrupt will be routed to the new handler. Our first example is with the divide by zero interrupt. The normal system defined behavior in response to divide by zero is to display an error message and terminate the program. We will change it to display our own message.

Example 8.1
001	; hooking divide by zero interrupt
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	message:	db	'You divided something by zero.', 0
006	
007-029	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-050 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (strlen) ;;;;;
030-049	;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;;
050-090	;;;;; COPY LINES 050-090 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (printstr) ;;;;;
091	
092	; divide by zero interrupt handler
093	myisrfor0:	push ax	; push all regs
094	push bx
095	push cx
096	push dx
097	push si
098	push di
099	push bp
100	push ds
101	push es
102	
103	push cs
104	pop ds	; point ds to our data segment
105	
106	call clrscr	; clear the screen
107	mov ax, 30
108	push ax	; push x position
109	mov ax, 20
110	push ax	; push y position
111	mov ax, 0x71	; white on blue attribute
112	push ax	; push attribute
113	mov ax, message
114	push ax	; push offset of message
115	call printstr	; print message
116	
117	pop es
118	pop ds
119	pop bp
 

120	pop di
121	pop si
123	pop dx
124	pop cx
125	pop bx
126	pop ax
127	iret	; return from interrupt
128	
129	; subroutine to generate a divide by zero interrupt
130	genint0:	mov ax, 0x8432	; load a big number in ax
131	mov bl, 2	; use a very small divisor
132	div bl	; interrupt 0 will be generated
133	ret
134	
135	start:	xor ax, ax
136	mov es, ax	; load zero in es
137	mov word [es:0*4], myisrfor0 ; store offset at n*4
138	mov [es:0*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
139	call genint0	; generate interrupt 0
140	
141	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
142	int 0x21
93-101	We often push all registers in an interrupt service routine just to be
	sure that no unintentional modification to any register is made.
	Since any code may be interrupted an unintentional modification
	will be hard to debug
103-104	Since interrupt can be called from anywhere we are not sure about
	the value in DS so we reset it to our code segment.

When this program is executed our desired message will be shown instead of the default message and the computer will hang thereafter. The first thing to observe is that there is no INT 0 call anywhere in the code. INT 0 was invoked automatically by an internal mechanism of the processor as a result of the DIV instruction producing a result that cannot fit in the destination  register. Just by changing the vector we have changed the response of the  system to divide overflow situations.
However the system stuck instead of returning to the next instruction. This is because divide overflow is a special type of interrupt that returns to the same instruction instead of the next instruction. This is why the default handler forcefully terminates the program instead of returning. Now the IRET will take control back to the DIV instruction which will again generate the same interrupt. So the computer is stuck in an infinite loop.

8.3.	BIOS AND DOS INTERRUPTS
In IBM PC there are certain interrupts designated for user programs to communicate with system software to access various standard services like access to the floppy drive, hard drive, vga, clock etc. If the programmer does not use these services he has to understand the hardware details like which particular controller is used and how it works. To avoid this and provide interoperability a software interface to basic hardware devices is provided except in very early computers. Since the manufacturer knows the hardware
 
This basic interface to the hardware is called BIOS (basic input output services). When the computer is switched on, BIOS gets the control at a specified address. The messages at boot time on the screen giving BIOS version, detecting different hardware are from this code. BIOS has the responsibility of testing the basic hardware including video, keyboard, floppy  drive, hard drive etc and a special program to bootstrap. Bootstrap means to load OS from hard disk and from there OS takes control and proceeds to load its components and display a command prompt in the end. There are two
 

important programs; BIOS and OS. OS services are high level and build upon the BIOS services. BIOS services are very low level.  A level further lower is only directly controlling the hardware. BIOS services provide a hardware independent layer above the hardware and OS services provide another higher level layer over the BIOS services. We have practiced direct hardware access with the video device directly without using BIOS or DOS. The layer of BIOS provides services like display a character, clear the screen, etc. All these layers are optional in that we can skip to whatever lower layer we want. The most logical way to provide access to firmware is to use the interrupt mechanism. Specific services are provided at specific interrupts. CALL could also have been used but in that case every manufacturer would be required to place specific routines at specific addresses, which is not a flexible mechanism. Interrupts provide standard interrupt number for the caller and flexibility to place the interrupt routine anywhere in the memory for the manufacturer. Now for the programmer it is decided that video services will be provided at INT 10 but the actual address of the video services can and do vary on computers from different manufacturers. Any computer that is IBM compatible must make the  video services accessible through INT 10. Similarly keyboard services are available at INT 16  and this is standard in every IBM compatible. Manufacturers place the code wherever they want and
the services are exported through this interrupt.
BIOS exports its various services through different interrupts. Keyboard services are exported through INT 16, parallel port services through INT 17 and similarly others through different interrupts.  DOS has a single entry point through INT 21 just like a pin hole camera, this single entry points leads to a number of DOS services. So how one interrupt provides a number of different services. A concept of service number is used here which is a defecto standard in providing multiple services through an interrupt. INT 10 is for video services and each of character printing service, screen clearing service, cursor movement service etc. has a service number associated to it. So we say INT 10 service 0 is used for this purpose and INT 10 service 1 is used for that purpose etc. Service numbers for different standard services are also fixed for every IBM compatible. The concept of exported services through interrupts is expanded with the service numbering scheme.
The service number is usually given in the AH register. Sometimes these 256 services seem less. For example DOS exports thousands of services. So will be often seen an extension to a level further with sub-services. For examples INT 10 character generator services are all provided through a single service number and the services are distinguished with a sub-service number.
The finally selected service would need some arguments for it to work. In interrupts arguments are usually not given through stack, rather registers are used. The BIOS and DOS specifications list which register contains which argument for a particular service of a particular interrupt.
We will touch some important BIOS and DOS services and not cover it completely neither is it possible to cover it in this space. A very comprehensive reference of interrupts is the Ralph Brown List. It is just a reference and not to be studied from end to end. All interrupts cannot be remembered and there is no need to remember them.
The service number is almost always in AH while the sub-service number is in AL or BL and sometimes in other registers. The documentation of the service we are using will list which register should hold what when the interrupt is invoked for that particular service.
Our first target using BIOS is video so let us proceed to our first program that uses INT 10 service 13 to print a string on the screen. BIOS will work even if the video memory is not at B8000 (a very old video card) since BIOS knows everything about the hardware and is hardware specific.
 

Example 8.2
001	; print string using bios service		
002	[org 0x0100]		
003	jmp start		
004	message:	db	'Hello World'		
005			
006	start:	mov ah, 0x13	;	service 13 - print string
007	mov al, 1	;	subservice 01 – update cursor
008	mov bh, 0	;	output on page 0
009	mov bl, 7	;	normal attrib
010	mov dx, 0x0A03	;	row 10 column 3
011	mov cx, 11	;	length of string
012	push cs		
013	pop es	;	segment of string
014	mov bp, message	;	offset of string
015	int 0x10	;	call BIOS video service
016			
017	mov ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
018	int 0x21		
007	The sub-service are versions of printstring that update and do not
	update the cursor after printing the string etc.
008	Text video screen is in the form of pages which can be upto 32. At
	one time one page is visible which is by default the zeroth page
	unless we change it.

When we execute it the string is printed and the cursor is updated as well. With direct access to video memory we had no control over the cursor. To control cursor a different mechanism to access the hardware was needed.
Our next example uses the keyboard service to read a key. The combination of keyboard and video services is used in almost every program that we see and use. We will wait for four key presses; clear the screen after the first, and draw different strings after the next key presses and exiting after the last. We will use INT 16 service 1 for this purpose. This is a blocking service so it does not return until a key has been pressed. We also used the blinking attribute in this example.
 

Example 8.3
001	; print string and keyboard wait using BIOS services
002	[org 0x100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	msg1:	db	'hello world', 0
006	msg2:	db	'hello world again', 0
007	msg3:	db	'hello world again and again', 0
008	
009-028	;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;;
029-069	;;;;; COPY LINES 050-090 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (printstr) ;;;;;
070-092	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-050 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (strlen) ;;;;;
093	
094	start:	mov ah, 0x10	; service 10 – vga attributes
095	mov al, 03	; subservice 3 – toggle blinking
096	mov bl, 01	; enable blinking bit
097	int 0x10	; call BIOS video service
098	
099	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
100	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
101	
102	call clrscr	; clear the screen
103	
104	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
105	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
106	
107	mov ax, 0
108	push ax	; push x position
109	mov ax, 0
110	push ax	; push y position
111	mov ax, 1	; blue on black
112	push ax	; push attribute
113	mov ax, msg1
114	push ax	; push offset of string
115	call printstr	; print the string
116	
117	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
118	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
119	
120	mov ax, 0
121	push ax	; push x position
123	mov ax, 0
124	push ax	; push y position
125	mov ax, 0x71	; blue on white
126	push ax	; push attribute
127	mov ax, msg2
128	push ax	; push offset of string
129	call printstr	; print the string
130	
131	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
132	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
133	
134	mov ax, 0
135	push ax	; push x position
136	mov ax, 0
137	push ax	; push y position
138	mov ax, 0xF4	; red on white blinking
139	push ax	; push attribute
140	mov ax, msg3
141	push ax	; push offset of string
142	call printstr	; print the string
143	
144	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
145	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
146	
147	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
148	int 0x21
099-100	This service has no parameters so only the service number is initialized in AH. This is the only service so there is no sub-service number as well. The ASCII code of the char pressed is returned in AL after this service.
 



EXERCISES
1.	Write a TSR that forces a program to exit when it tries to become a TSR using INT 21h/Service 31h by converting its call into INT 21h/Service 4Ch.
2.	Write a function to clear the screen whose only parameter is always zero. The function is hooked at interrupt 80h and may also be called directly both as a near call and as a far call. The function should detect how it is called and return appropriately. It is provided that the direction flag will be set before the function is called.
3.	Write a function that takes three parameters, the interrupt number
(N) and the segment and offset of an interrupt handler XISR. The arguments are pushed in the order N, XISR’s offset and XISR’s segment. It is known that the first two instructions of XISR are PUSHF and CALL 0:0 followed by the rest of the interrupt handler. PUSHF instruction is of one byte and far call is of 5 bytes with the first byte being the op-code, the next two containing the target offset and the last two containing the target segment. The function should hook XISR at interrupt N and chain it to the interrupt handler previously hooked at N by manipulating the call 0:0 instruction placed near the start of XISR.
4.	Write a TSR that provide the circular queue services via interrupt 0x80 using the code written in Exercise 5.XX. The interrupt procedure should call one of qcreate, qdestroy, qempty, qadd, qremove, and uninstall based on the value in AH. The uninstall function should restore the old interrupt 0x80 handler and remove the TSR from memory.
 

 
9
Real Time Interrupts and Hardware Interfacing

9.1.	HARDWARE INTERRUPTS
 The same mechanism as discussed in the previous chapter is used for real  interrupts that are generated by external hardware. However there is a single  pin outside the processor called the INT pin that is used by external  hardware to generate interrupts. The detailed operation that happens outside  the process when an interrupt is generated is complex and only a simplified view will be discussed here; the view that is relevant to an assembly language programmer. There are many external devices that need the processor’s attention like the keyboard, hard disk, floppy disk, sound card.  All of them need real time interrupts at some point in their operation. For example if a program is busy in some calculations for three minutes the key strokes that are hit meanwhile should not be wasted. Therefore when a key is pressed, the INT signal is sent, an interrupt generated and the interrupt handler stores the key for later use. Similarly when the printer is busy printing we cannot send it more data. As soon as it gets free from the previous job it interrupts the processor to inform that it is free now. There are many other examples where the processor needs to be informed of an external event. If the processor actively monitors all devices instead of being automatically interrupted then it there won’t be any time to do meaningful work.
Since there are many devices generating interrupts and there is only one pin going inside the processor and one pin cannot be technically derived by more than one source a controller is used in between called the Programmable Interrupt Controller (PIC). It has eight input signals and one output signal. It assigns priorities to its eight input pins from 0 to 7 so that if more than one interrupt comes at the same times, the highest priority one is forwarded and the rest are held till that is serviced. The rest are forwarded one by one according to priority after the highest priority one is completed. The original IBM XT computer had one PIC so there were 8 possible interrupt sources. However IBM AT and later computers have two PIC totaling 16 possible interrupt sources. They are arrange is a special cascade master slave arrangement so that only one output signal comes towards the processor. However we will concentrate on the first interrupt controller only.
The priority can be understood with the following example. Consider eight parallel switches which are all closed and connected to form the output signal. When a signal comes on one of the switches, it is passed on to the output and this switch and all below it are opened so that no further signals can pass through it. The higher priority switches are still closed and the signal on them can be forwarded. When the processor signals that it is finished with the processing the switches are closed again and any waiting interrupts may be forwarded. The way the processor signals ending of the interrupt service routine is by using a special mechanism discussed later.
The eight input signals to the PIC are called Interrupt Requests (IRQ). The eight lines are called IRQ 0 to IRQ 7. These are the input lines of the 8451.† For example IRQ 0 is derived by a timer device. The timer device keeps

† 8259 is the technical number of the PIC.
 

generating interrupts with a specified frequency. IRQ 1 is derived by the keyboard when generates an interrupts when a key  is pressed or released. IRQ 2 is the cascading interrupt connected to the output of the second 8451 in the machine. IRQ 3 is connected to serial port COM 2 while IRQ 4 is connected to serial port COM 1. IRQ 5 is used by the sound card or the network card or the modem. An IRQ conflict means that two devices in the system want to use the same IRQ line. IRQ 6 is used by the floppy disk drive while IRQ 7 is used by the parallel port. 
Each IRQ is mapped to a specific interrupt in the system. This is called the IRQ to INT mapping. IRQ 0 to IRQ 7 are consecutively mapped on interrupts 8 to F. This mapping is done by the PIC and not the processor. The actual mechanism fetches one instruction from the PIC whenever the INT pin is signaled instead of the memory. We can program the PIC to generate a different set of interrupts on the same interrupt requests. From the perspective of an assembly language programmer an IRQ 0 is translated into  an INT 8 without any such instruction in the program and that’s all. Therefore an IRQ 0, the highest priority interrupt, is generated by the timer chip at a precise frequency and the handler at INT 8 is invoked which updates the system time. A key press generates IRQ 1 and the INT 9 handler is invoked which stores this key. To handler the timer and keyboard interrupts one can replace the vectors corresponding to interrupt 8 and 9 respectively. For example if the timer interrupt is replaced and the floppy is accessed by some program, the floppy motor and its light will remain on for ever as in the normal case it is turned off by the timer interrupt after two seconds  in  anticipation  that  another  floppy  access  might  be  needed otherwise the time motor takes to speed up will be needed again.‡
We have seen that an interrupt request from a device enters the PIC as an IRQ, from there it reaches the INT pin of the processor, the processor receives the interrupt number from the PIC, generates the designated interrupt, and finally the interrupt handler gain control and can do whatever is desired. At the end of servicing the interrupt the handler should inform the PIC that it is completed so that lower priority interrupts can be sent from the PIC.  This signal is called an End Of Interrupt (EOI) signal and is sent through the I/O ports of the interrupt controller.

9.2.	I/O PORTS
There are hundreds of peripheral devices in the system, PIC is one example. The processor needs to communicate with them, give and take data from them, otherwise their presence is meaningless. Memory has a totally different purpose. It contains the program to be executed and its data. It does not control any hardware. For communicating with peripheral devices  the processor uses I/O ports. There are only two operations with the external  world possible, read or write. Similarly with I/O ports the processor can read  or write an I/O port. When an I/O port is read or written to, the operation is not as simple as it happens in memory. Some hardware changes it functionality or performs some operation as a result.
IBM PC has separate memory address space and peripheral address space.  Some processors use memory mapped I/O in which case designated memory cells work as ports for specific devices. In case of Intel a special pin on the control bus signals whether the current read or write is from the memory address space or from the peripheral address space. The same address and data buses are used to select a port and to read or write data from that port. However with I/O only the lower 16 bits of the address bus are used meaning that there are a total of 65536 possible I/O ports. Now keyboard has special

‡ The programs discussed from now onwards in the book must be executed in pure DOS and not in a DOS window so that we are in total control of the PIC and other devices.
 

I/O ports designated to it, PIC has others, DMA, sound card, network card, each has some ports.
If the two address spaces are differentiated in hardware, they must also have special instructions to select the other address space. We have the IN  and OUT instructions to read or write from the peripheral address space.  When MOV is given the processor selects the memory address space, when  IN is given the processor selects the peripheral address space.

IN and OUT instructions
The IN and OUT instructions have a byte form and a word form but the byte form is almost always used. The source register in OUT and destination register in IN is AL or AX depending on which form is used. The port number can be directly given in the instruction if it fits in a byte otherwise it has to be given in the DX register. Port numbers for specific devices are fixed by the IBM standard. For example 20 and 21 are for PIC, 60 to 64 for Keyboard, 378 for the parallel port etc. A few example of IN and OUT are below:
in al, 0x21
mov dx, 0x378 in al, dx
out 0x21, al
mov dx, 0x378 out dx, al

PIC Ports
Programmable interrupt controller has two ports 20 and 21. Port 20 is the control port while port 21 is the interrupt mask register which can be used for selectively enabling or disabling interrupts. Each of the bits at port 21 corresponds to one of the IRQ lines. We first write a small program to disable the keyboard using this port. As we know that the keyboard IRQ is 1, we place a 1 bit at its corresponding position. A 0 bit will enable an interrupt  and a 1 bit disables it. As soon as we write it on the port keyboard interrupts  will stop arriving and the keyboard will effectively be disabled. Even Ctrl-Alt- Del would not work; the reset power button has to be used.

Example 9.1
001	; disable keyboard interrupt in PIC mask register
002	[org 0x0100]
003	in	al, 0x21	; read interrupt mask register
004	or	al, 2	; set bit for IRQ2
005	out 0x21, al	; write back mask register
006	
007	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
008	int 0x21
	
After this three line mini program is executed the computer will not understand anything else. Its ears are closed. No keystrokes are making their way to the processor. Ports always make something happen on the system. A properly designed system can launch a missile on writing a bit on some port. Memory is simple in that it is all that it is. In ports every bit has a meaning that changes something in the system.
As we previously discussed every interrupt handler invoked because of  an IRQ must signal an EOI otherwise lower priority interrupts will remain disabled.

Keyboard Controller
We will go in further details of the keyboard and its relation to the computer. We will not discuss how the keyboard communicates with the keyboard controller in the computer rather we will discuss how the keyboard
 

controller communicates with the processor. Keyboard is a collection of labeled buttons and every button is designated a number (not the ASCII code). This number is sent to the processor whenever the key is pressed. From this number called the scan code the processor understands which key was pressed. For each key the scan code comes twice, once for the key press and once for the key release. Both are scan codes and differ in one bit only. The lower seven bits contain the key number while the most significant bit is clear in the press code and set in the release code. The IBM PC standard gives a table of the scan codes of all keys.
If we press Shift-A resulting in a capital A on the screen, the controller has sent the press code of Shift, the press code of A, the release code of A, the release code of Shift and the interrupt handler has understood that this sequence should result in the ASCII code of ‘A’. The ‘A’ key always produces the same scan code whether or not shift is pressed. It is the interrupt handler’s job to remember that the press code of Shift has come and release code has not yet come and therefore to change the meaning of the following key presses. Even the caps lock key works the same way.
An interesting thing is that the two shift keys on the left and right side of the keyboard produce different scan codes. The standard way implemented in BIOS is to treat that similarly. That’s why we always think of them as identical. If we leave BIOS and talk directly with the hardware we can differentiate between left and right shift keys with their scan code. Now this scan code is available from the keyboard data port which is 60. The keyboard generates IRQ 1 whenever a key is pressed so if we hook INT 9 and inside it read port 60 we can tell which of the shift keys was hit. Our first program will do precisely this. It will output an L if the left shift key was pressed and R if the right one was pressed. The hooking method is the same as done in the previous chapter.

Example 9.2
001	; differentiate left and right shift keys with scancodes
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; keyboard interrupt service routine
006	kbisr:	push ax
007	push es
008	
009	mov ax, 0xb800
010	mov es, ax	; point es to video memory
011	
012	in	al, 0x60	; read a char from keyboard port
013	cmp al, 0x2a	; is the key left shift
014	jne nextcmp	; no, try next comparison
015	
016	mov byte [es:0], 'L'	; yes, print L at top left
017	jmp nomatch	; leave interrupt routine
018	
019	nextcmp:	cmp al, 0x36	; is the key right shift
020	jne nomatch	; no, leave interrupt routine
021	
022	mov byte [es:0], 'R'	; yes, print R at top left
023	
024	nomatch:	mov al, 0x20
025	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
026	
027	pop es
028	pop ax
029	iret
030	
031	start:	xor ax, ax
032	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
033	cli	; disable interrupts
034	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
035	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
036	sti	; enable interrupts
 

037
038	
l1:	jmp l1	; infinite loop
033-036	CLI  clears  the  interrupt  flag  to  disable  the  interrupt  system completely. The processor closes its ears and does not care about the  state  of  the  INT  pin.  Interrupt  hooking  is  done  in  two instructions, placing the segment and placing the offset. If an  interrupt comes in between and the vector is in an indeterminate  state, the system will go to a junk address and eventually crash. So we stop all interruptions while changing a real time interrupt vector.
We set the interrupt flag afterwards to renewable interrupts.
038	The program hangs in an infinite loop. The only activity can be
caused by a real time interrupt. The kbisr routine is not called from anywhere; it is only automatically invoked as a result of IRQ 1.

When the program is executed the left and right shift keys can be distinguished with the L or R on the screen. As no action was taken for the rest of the keys, they are effectively disabled and the computer has to be rebooted. To check that the keyboard is actually disabled we change the program and add the INT 16 service 0 at the end to wait for an Esc key press. As soon as Esc is pressed we want to terminate our program.

Example 9.3
001	; attempt to terminate program with Esc that hooks keyboard interrupt
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005-029	;;;;; COPY LINES 005-029 FROM EXAMPLE 9.2 (kbisr) ;;;;;
030	
031	start:	xor ax, ax
032	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
033	cli	; disable interrupts
034	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
035	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
036	sti	; enable interrupts
037	
038	l1:	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
039	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
040	
041	cmp al, 27	; is the Esc key pressed
042	jne l1	; if no, check for next key
043	
044	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
045	int 0x21
	

When the program is executed the behavior is same. Esc does not work. This is because the original IRQ 1 handler was written by BIOS that read the scan code, converted into an ASCII code and stored in the keyboard buffer. The BIOS INT 16 read the key from there and gives in AL. When we hooked the keyboard interrupt BIOS is no longer in control, it has no information, it will always see the empty buffer and INT 16 will never return.

Interrupt Chaining
We can transfer control to the original BIOS ISR in the end of our routine. This way the normal functioning of INT 16 can work as well. We can retrieve the address of the BIOS routine by saving the values in vector 9 before hooking our routine. In the end of our routine we will jump to this address using a special indirect form of the JMP FAR instruction.

 

001	; another attempt to terminate program with Esc that hooks
002	; keyboard interrupt
003	[org 0x100]
004	jmp start
005	
006	oldisr:	dd	0	; space for saving old isr
007	
008	; keyboard interrupt service routine
009	kbisr:	push ax
010	push es
011	
012	mov ax, 0xb800
013	mov es, ax	; point es to video memory
014	
015	in	al, 0x60	; read a char from keyboard port
016	cmp al, 0x2a	; is the key left shift
017	jne nextcmp	; no, try next comparison
018	
019	mov byte [es:0], 'L'	; yes, print L at top left
020	jmp nomatch	; leave interrupt routine
021	
022	nextcmp:	cmp al, 0x36	; is the key right shift
023	jne nomatch	; no, leave interrupt routine
024	
025	mov byte [es:0], 'R'	; yes, print R at top left
026	
027	nomatch:	; mov al, 0x20
028	; out 0x20, al
029	
030	pop es
031	pop ax
032	jmp far [cs:oldisr]	; call the original ISR
033	; iret
034	
035	start:	xor ax, ax
036	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
037	mov ax, [es:9*4]
038	mov [oldisr], ax	; save offset of old routine
039	mov ax, [es:9*4+2]
040	mov [oldisr+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
041	cli	; disable interrupts
042	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
043	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
044	sti	; enable interrupts
045	
046	l1:	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
047	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
048	
049	cmp al, 27	; is the Esc key pressed
050	jne l1	; if no, check for next key
051	
052	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
053	int 0x21
027-028	EOI is no longer needed as the original BIOS routine will have it at its end.
033	IRET has been removed and an unconditional jump is introduced. At time of JMP the stack has the exact formation as was when the  interrupt came. So the original BIOS routine’s IRET will take control  to the interrupted program. We have been careful in restoring every register we modified and retained the stack in the same form as it was at the time of entry into the routine.

When the program is executed L and R are printed as desired and Esc terminates the program as well. Normal commands like DIR work now and shift keys still show L and R as our routine did even after the termination of our program. Now start some application like the editor, it open well but as soon as a key is pressed the computer crashes.
Actually our hooking and chaining was fine. When Esc was pressed we signaled DOS that our program has terminated. DOS will take all our
 

memory as a result. The routine is still in memory and functioning but the memory is free according to DOS. As soon as we load EDIT the same memory is allocated to EDIT and our routine as overwritten. Now when a key is pressed our routine’s address is in the vector but at that address some new code is placed that is not intended to be an interrupt handler. That may be data or some part of the EDIT program. This results in crashing the computer.

Unhooking Interrupt
We now add the interrupt restoring part to our program. This code resets the interrupt vector to the value it had before the start of our program.

Example 9.5
001	; terminate program with Esc that hooks keyboard interrupt
002	[org 0x100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	oldisr:	dd	0	; space for saving old isr
006	
007-032	;;;;; COPY LINES 005-029 FROM EXAMPLE 9.4 (kbisr) ;;;;;
033	
034	start:	xor ax, ax
035	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
036	mov ax, [es:9*4]
037	mov [oldisr], ax	; save offset of old routine
038	mov ax, [es:9*4+2]
039	mov [oldisr+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
040	cli	; disable interrupts
041	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
042	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
043	sti	; enable interrupts
044	
045	l1:	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
046	int 0x16	; call BIOS keyboard service
047	
048	cmp al, 27	; is the Esc key pressed
049	jne l1	; if no, check for next key
050	
051	mov ax, [oldisr]	; read old offset in ax
052	mov bx, [oldisr+2]	; read old segment in bx
053	cli	; disable interrupts
054	mov [es:9*4], ax	; restore old offset from ax
055	mov [es:9*4+2], bx	; restore old segment from bx
056	sti	; enable interrupts
057	
058	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
059	int 0x21

9.3.	TERMINATE AND STAY RESIDENT
  We change the display to show L only while the left shift is pressed and R  only while the right shift is pressed to show the use of the release codes. We  also changed that shift keys are not forwarded to BIOS. The effect will be visible with A and Shift-A both producing small ‘a’ but caps lock will work.
There is one major difference from all the programs we have been writing till now. The termination is done using INT 21 service 31 instead of INT 21  service 4C. The effect is that even after termination the program is there and  is legally there.

Example 9.6
001
002
003
004
005
006	; TSR to show status of shift keys on top left of screen [org 0x0100]
jmp start
oldisr:	dd	0	; space for saving old isr
 

007	; keyboard interrupt service routine
008	kbisr:	push ax
009	push es
010	
011	mov ax, 0xb800
012	mov es, ax	; point es to video memory
013	
014	in	al, 0x60	; read a char from keyboard port
015	cmp al, 0x2a	; has the left shift pressed
016	jne nextcmp	; no, try next comparison
017	
018	mov byte [es:0], 'L'	; yes, print L at first column
019	jmp exit	; leave interrupt routine
020	
021	nextcmp:	cmp al, 0x36	; has the right shift pressed
022	jne nextcmp2	; no, try next comparison
023	
024	mov byte [es:0], 'R'	; yes, print R at second column
025	jmp exit	; leave interrupt routine
026	
027	nextcmp2:	cmp al, 0xaa	; has the left shift released
028	jne nextcmp3	; no, try next comparison
029	
030	mov byte [es:0], ' '	; yes, clear the first column
031	jmp exit	; leave interrupt routine
032	
033	nextcmp3:	cmp al, 0xb6	; has the right shift released
034	jne nomatch	; no, chain to old ISR
035	
036	mov byte [es:2], ' '	; yes, clear the second column
037	jmp exit	; leave interrupt routine
038	
039	nomatch:	pop es
040	pop ax
041	jmp far [cs:oldisr]	; call the original ISR
042	
043	exit:	mov al, 0x20
044	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
045	
046	pop es
047	pop ax
048	iret	; return from interrupt
049	
050	start:	xor ax, ax
051	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
052	mov ax, [es:9*4]
053	mov [oldisr], ax	; save offset of old routine
054	mov ax, [es:9*4+2]
055	mov [oldisr+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
056	cli	; disable interrupts
057	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
058	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
059	sti	; enable interrupts
060	
061	mov dx, start	; end of resident portion
062	add dx, 15	; round up to next para
063	mov cl, 4
064	shr dx, cl	; number of paras
065	mov ax, 0x3100	; terminate and stay resident
066	int 0x21

When this program is executed the command prompt immediately comes. DIR can be seen. EDIT can run and keypresses do not result in a crash. And with all that left and right shift keys shown L and R on top left of the screen while they are pressed but the shift keys do not work as usual since we did not forwarded the key to BIOS. This is selective chaining.
 

 

programs the DOS memory formation	and	allocation procedure			must		be understood.		At		physical address zero is the interrupt vector table. Then are the BIOS data area, DOS data area, IO.SYS, MSDOS.SYS and
other device drivers. In the end there	is				COMMAND.COM command			interpreter.	 The remaining space is called the transient	program	area		as programs		are	loaded	and executed in this area and the space reclaimed on their exit. A freemem pointer in DOS  points where the free memory  begins.  When  DOS  loads  a 
 
0

















640K
 
program the freemem pointer is moved to the end of memory, all the available space is allocated to it, and when it exits the freemem pointer
 
The second method to legally terminate a program and give control back to DOS is using the service 31. Control is still taken back but the memory releasing part is modified. A portion of the allocated memory can be retained. So the difference in the two methods is that the freemem pointer goes back to the original place or a designated number of bytes ahead of that old position. Remember that our program crashed because the interrupt routine was overwritten. If we can tell DOS not to reclaim the memory of the interrupt routine, then it will not crash. In the last program we have told DOS to make a number of bytes resident. It becomes a part of the operation system, an extension to it. Just like DOSKEY§ is an extension to the operation system. 
The number of paragraphs to reserve is given in the DX register. Paragraph is a unit just like byte, word, and double word. A paragraph is 16 bytes.  Therefore we can reserve in multiple of 16 bytes. We write TSRs in such a  way that the initialization code and data is located at the end as it is not necessary to make it resident and therefore to save space.
To calculate the number of paragraphs a label is placed after the last line that is to be made resident. The value of that label is the number of bytes needed to be made resident. A simple division by 16 will not give the correct number of paras as we want our answer to be rounded up and not down. For example 100 bytes should need 7 pages but division gives 6 and a remainder of 4. A standard technique to get rounded up integer division is to add divisor-1 to the dividend and then divide. So we add 15 to the number of bytes and then divide by 16. We use shifting for division as the divisor is a power of 2. We use a form of SHR that places the count in the CL register so that we can shift by 4 in just two instructions instead of 4 if we shift one by one.
In our program anything after start label is not needed after the program has become a TSR. We can observe that our program has become a part of DOS by giving the following command.
mem /c

§  DOSKEY is a TSR that shows the previous commands on the command prompt with up and down arrows and allows editing of the command
 

 
9.4.	PROGRAMMABLE INTERVAL TIMER 
Another very important  peripheral device is the Programmable Interval Timer (PIT), the  chip numbered 8254. This chip has a precise input frequency of 1.19318 MHz. This frequency is fixed regardless of the processor clock. Inside the chip is a 16bit divisor which divides this input frequency and the output is connected to the IRQ 0 line of the PIC. The special number 0 if placed in the divisor means a divisor of 65536 and not 0. The standard divisor is 0 unless we change it. Therefore by default IRQ 0 is generated 1193180/65536=18.2 times per second. This is called the timer tick. There is an interval of about 55ms between two timer ticks. The system time is maintained with the timer interrupt. This is the highest priority interrupt and breaks whatever is executing. Time can be maintained with this interrupt as this frequency is very precise and is part of the IBM standard.
  When writing a TSR we give control back to DOS so TSR activation,  reactivation and action is solely interrupt based, whether this is a hardware  interrupt or a software one. Control is never given back; it must be caught, just like we caught control by hooking the keyboard interrupt. Our next example will hook the timer interrupt and display a tick count on the screen.

Example 9.7
001	; display a tick count on the top right of screen
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	tickcount:	dw	0
006	
007	; subroutine to print a number at top left of screen
008	; takes the number to be printed as its parameter
009	printnum:	push bp
010	mov bp, sp
011	push es
012	push ax
013	push bx
014	push cx
015	push dx
016	push di
017	
018	mov ax, 0xb800
019	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
020	mov ax, [bp+4]	; load number in ax
021	mov bx, 10	; use base 10 for division
022	mov cx, 0	; initialize count of digits
023	
024	nextdigit:	mov dx, 0	; zero upper half of dividend
025	div bx	; divide by 10
026	add dl, 0x30	; convert digit into ascii value
027	push dx	; save ascii value on stack
028	inc cx	; increment count of values
029	cmp ax, 0	; is the quotient zero
030	jnz nextdigit	; if no divide it again
031	
032	mov di, 140	; point di to 70th column
033	
034	nextpos:	pop dx	; remove a digit from the stack
035	mov dh, 0x07	; use normal attribute
036	mov [es:di], dx	; print char on screen
037	add di, 2	; move to next screen location
038	loop nextpos	; repeat for all digits on stack
039	
040	pop di
041	pop dx
042	pop cx
043	pop bx
044	pop ax
 

045	pop es

046	pop bp
047	ret 2
048	
049	; timer interrupt service routine
050	timer:	push ax
051	
052	inc word [cs:tickcount]; increment tick count
053	push word [cs:tickcount]
054	call printnum	; print tick count
055	
056	mov al, 0x20
057	out 0x20, al	; end of interrupt
058	
059	pop ax
060	iret	; return from interrupt
061	
062	start:	xor ax, ax
063	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
064	cli	; disable interrupts
065	mov word [es:8*4], timer; store offset at n*4
066	mov [es:8*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
067	sti	; enable interrupts
068	
069	mov dx, start	; end of resident portion
070	add dx, 15	; round up to next para
071	mov cl, 4
072	shr dx, cl	; number of paras
073	mov ax, 0x3100	; terminate and stay resident
074	int 0x21

When we execute the program the counter starts on the screen. Whatever we do, take directory, open EDIT, the debugger etc. the counter remains
 
Our next example will hook both the keyboard and timer interrupts. When the shift key is pressed the tick count starts incrementing and as soon as the shift key is released the tick count stops. Both interrupt handlers are communicating through a common variable. The keyboard interrupt sets this variable while the timer interrupts modifies its behavior according to this  variable.

Example 9.8
001	; display a tick count while the left shift key is down
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	seconds:	dw	0
006	timerflag:	dw	0
007	oldkb:	dd	0
008	
009-049	;;;;; COPY LINES 007-047 FROM EXAMPLE 9.7 (printnum) ;;;;;
050	
051	; keyboard interrupt service routine
052	kbisr:	push ax
053	
054	in	al, 0x60	; read char from keyboard port
055	cmp al, 0x2a	; has the left shift pressed
056	jne nextcmp	; no, try next comparison
057	
058	cmp word [cs:timerflag], 1; is the flag already set
059	je	exit	; yes, leave the ISR
060	
061	mov word [cs:timerflag], 1; set flag to start printing
062	jmp exit	; leave the ISR
063	
064	nextcmp:	cmp al, 0xaa	; has the left shift released
065	jne nomatch	; no, chain to old ISR
066	
067	mov word [cs:timerflag], 0; reset flag to stop printing
 

068	jmp exit	; leave the interrupt routine
069	
070	nomatch:	pop ax
071	jmp far [cs:oldkb]	; call original ISR
072	
073	exit:	mov al, 0x20
074	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
075	
076	pop ax
077	iret	; return from interrupt
078	
079	; timer interrupt service routine
080	timer:	push ax
081	
082	cmp word [cs:timerflag], 1 ; is the printing flag set
083	jne skipall	; no, leave the ISR
084	
085	inc word [cs:seconds] ; increment tick count
086	push word [cs:seconds]
087	call printnum	; print tick count
088	
089	skipall:	mov al, 0x20
090	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
091	
092	pop ax
093	iret	; return from interrupt
094	
095	start:	xor ax, ax
096	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
097	mov ax, [es:9*4]
098	mov [oldkb], ax	; save offset of old routine
099	mov ax, [es:9*4+2]
100	mov [oldkb+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
101	cli	; disable interrupts
102	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
103	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
104	mov word [es:8*4], timer ; store offset at n*4
105	mov [es:8*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+
106	sti	; enable interrupts
107	
108	mov dx, start	; end of resident portion
109	add dx, 15	; round up to next para
110	mov cl, 4
111	shr dx, cl	; number of paras
112	mov ax, 0x3100	; terminate and stay resident
113	int 0x21
006	This flag is one when the timer interrupt should increment and zero
	when it should not.
058-059	As the keyboard controller repeatedly generates the press code if the
	release code does not come in a specified time, we have placed a
	check to not repeatedly set it to one.
058	Another way to access TSR data is using the CS override instead of
	initializing DS. It is common mistake not to initialize DS and also

	not put in CS override in a real time interrupt handler.

When we execute the program and the shift key is pressed, the counter starts incrementing. When the key is released the counter stops. When it is pressed again the counter resumes counting. As this is made as a TSR any other program can be loaded and will work properly alongside the TSR.

our examples we will use the parallel port. The parallel port has two views, the connector that the external world sees and the parallel port controller 
 

ports through which the processor communicates with the device connected to the parallel port.
The parallel port connector is a 25pin connector called DB-25. Different pins of this connector have different meanings. Some are meaningful only with the printer**. This is a bidirectional port so there are some pins to take data from the processor to the parallel port and others to take data from the parallel port to the processor. Important pins for our use are the data pins from pin 2 to pin 9 that take data from the processor to the device. Pin 10, the ACK pin, is normally used by the printer to acknowledge the receipt of data and show the willingness to receive more data. Signaling this pin generates IRQ 7 if enabled in the PIC and in the parallel port controller. Pin 18-25 are ground and must be connected to the external circuit ground to provide the common reference point otherwise they won’t understand each other voltage levels. Like the datum point in a graph this is the datum point of an electrical circuit. The remaining pins are not of our concern in these examples.
This is the external view of the parallel port. The processor cannot see these pins. The processor uses the I/O ports of the parallel port controller. The first parallel port LPT1†† has ports designated from 378 to 37A. The first port 378 is the data port.  If we use the OUT instruction on this port, 1 bits result in a 5V signal on the corresponding pin and a 0 bits result in a 0V signal on the corresponding pin.
Port 37A is the control port. Our interest is with bit 4 of this port which enables the IRQ 7 triggering by the ACK pin. We have attached a circuit that connects 8 LEDs with the parallel port pins. The following examples sends the scancode of the key pressed to the parallel port so that it is visible on LEDs.

Example 9.9
001	; show scancode on external LEDs connected through parallel port
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	oldisr:	dd	0	; space for saving old ISR
006	
007	; keyboard interrupt service routine
008	kbisr:	push ax
009	push dx
010	
011	in	al, 0x60	; read char from keyboard port
012	mov dx, 0x378
013	out dx, al	; write char to parallel port
014	
015	pop ax
016	pop dx
017	jmp far [cs:oldisr]	; call original ISR
018	
019	start:	xor ax, ax
020	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
021	mov ax, [es:9*4]
022	mov [oldisr], ax	; save offset of old routine
023	mov ax, [es:9*4+2]
024	mov [oldisr+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
025	cli	; disable interrupts
026	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
027	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
028	sti	; enable interrupts
029	
030	mov dx, start	; end of resident portion
031	add dx, 15	; round up to next para

** The parallel port is most commonly used with the printer. However some new printers have started using the USB port.
†† Older computer had more than one parallel port named LPT2 and having ports from 278-27A.
 

032
mov	cl,	4	
033	shr	dx,	cl	; number of paras
034	mov	ax,	0x3100	; terminate and stay resident
035	int	0x21		

The following example uses the same LED circuit and sends data such that LEDs switch on and off turn by turn so that it looks like light is moving back and forth.

Example 9.10
001	; show lights moving back and forth on external LEDs
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	signal:	db	1	; current state of lights
006	direction:	db	0	; current direction of motion
007	
008	; timer interrupt service routine
009	timer:	push ax
010	push dx
011	push ds
012	
013	push cs
014	pop ds	; initialize ds to data segment
015	
016	cmp byte [direction], 1; are moving in right direction
017	je	moveright	; yes, go to shift right code
018	
019	shl byte [signal], 1	; shift left state of lights
020	jnc output	; no jump to change direction
021	
022	mov byte [direction], 1; change direction to right
023	mov byte [signal], 0x80; turn on left most light
024	jmp output	; proceed to send signal
025	
026	moveright:	shr byte [signal], 1	; shift right state of lights
027	jnc output	; no jump to change direction
028	
029	mov byte [direction], 0; change direction to left
030	mov byte [signal], 1	; turn on right most light
031	
032	output:	mov al, [signal]	; load lights state in al
033	mov dx, 0x378	; parallel port data port
034	out dx, al	; send light state of port
035	
036	mov al, 0x20
037	out 0x20, al	; send EOI on PIC
038	
039	pop ds
040	pop dx
041	pop ax
042	iret	; return from interrupt
043	
044	start:	xor ax, ax
045	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
046	cli	; disable interrupts
047	mov word [es:8*4], timer ; store offset at n*4
048	mov [es:8*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
049	sti	; enable interrupts
050	
051	mov dx, start	; end of resident portion
052	add dx, 15	; round up to next para
053	mov cl, 4
054	shr dx, cl	; number of paras
055	mov ax, 0x3100	; terminate and stay resident
056	int 0x21

We will now use the parallel port to control a slightly complicated circuit. This time we will also use the parallel port interrupt. We are using a 220 V bulb with AC input. AC current is 50Hz sine wave. We have made our circuit such that it triggers the parallel port interrupt whenever the since wave
 

crosses zero. We have control of passing the AC current to the bulb. We control it such that in every cycle only a fixed percentage of time the current passes on to the bulb. Using this we can control the intensity or glow of the bulb.
Our first example will slowly turn on the bulb by increasing the power provided using the mechanism just described.

Example 9.11
001	; slowly turn on a bulb by gradually increasing the power provided
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	flag:	db	0	; next time turn on or turn off
006	stop:	db	0	; flag to terminate the program
007	divider:	dw	11000	; divider for minimum intensity
008	oldtimer:	dd	0	; space for saving old isr
009	
010	; timer interrupt service routine
011	timer:	push ax
012	push dx
013	
014	cmp byte [cs:flag], 0 ; are we here to turn off
015	je	switchoff	; yes, go to turn off code
016	
017	switchon:	mov al, 1
018	mov dx, 0x378
019	out dx, al	; no, turn the bulb on
020	
021	mov ax, 0x0100
022	out 0x40, al	; set timer divisor LSB to 0
023	mov al, ah
024	out 0x40, al	; set timer divisor MSB to 1
025	mov byte [cs:flag], 0 ; flag next timer to switch off
026	jmp exit	; leave the interrupt routine
027	
028	switchoff:	xor ax, ax
029	mov dx, 0x378
030	out dx, al	; turn the bulb off
031	
032	exit:	mov al, 0x20
033	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
034	
035	pop dx
036	pop ax
037	iret	; return from interrupt
038	
039	; parallel port interrupt service routine
040	parallel:	push ax
041	
042	mov al, 0x30	; set timer to one shot mode
043	out 0x43, al
044	
045	cmp word [cs:divider], 100; is the current divisor 100
046	je	stopit	; yes, stop
047	
048	sub word [cs:divider], 10; decrease the divisor by 10
049	mov ax, [cs:divider]
050	out 0x40, al	; load divisor LSB in timer
051	mov al, ah
052	out 0x40, al	; load divisor MSB in timer
053	mov byte [cs:flag], 1 ; flag next timer to switch on
054	
055	mov al, 0x20
056	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
057	pop ax
058	iret	; return from interrupt
059	
060	stopit:	mov byte [stop], 1	; flag to terminate the program
061	mov al, 0x20
062	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
063	pop ax
064	iret	; return from interrupt
065	
 

066	start:
xor	ax, ax	
067		mov	es, ax	; point es to IVT base
068		mov	ax, [es:0x08*4]	
069		mov	[oldtimer], ax	; save offset of old routine
070		mov	ax, [es:0x08*4+2]	
071		mov	[oldtimer+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
072		cli		; disable interrupts
073		mov	word [es:0x08*4],	timer ; store offset at n*4
074		mov	[es:0x08*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
075		mov	word [es:0x0F*4],	parallel ; store offset at n*4
076		mov	[es:0x0F*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
077		sti		; enable interrupts
078				
079		mov	dx, 0x37A	
080		in	al, dx	; parallel port control register
081		or	al, 0x10	; turn interrupt enable bit on
082		out	dx, al	; write back register
083				
084		in	al, 0x21	; read interrupt mask register
085		and	al, 0x7F	; enable IRQ7 for parallel port
086		out	0x21, al	; write back register
087				
088	recheck:	cmp	byte [stop], 1	; is the termination flag set
089		jne	recheck	; no, check again
090				
091		mov	dx, 0x37A	
092		in	al, dx	; parallel port control register
093		and	al, 0xEF	; turn interrupt enable bit off
094		out	dx, al	; write back register
095				
096		in	al, 0x21	; read interrupt mask register
097		or	al, 0x80	; disable IRQ7 for parallel port
098		out	0x21, al	; write back regsiter
099				
100		cli		; disable interrupts
101		mov	ax, [oldtimer]	; read old timer ISR offset
102		mov	[es:0x08*4], ax	; restore old timer ISR offset
103		mov	ax, [oldtimer+2]	; read old timer ISR segment
104		mov	[es:0x08*4+2], ax	; restore old timer ISR segment
105		sti		; enable interrupts
106				
107		mov	ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
108		int	0x21	

The next example is simply the opposite of the previous. It slowly turns the bulb off from maximum glow to no glow.

Example 9.12
001	; slowly turn off a bulb by gradually decreasing the power provided
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	flag:	db	0	; next time turn on or turn off
006	stop:	db	0	; flag to terminate the program
007	divider:	dw	0	; divider for maximum intensity
008	oldtimer:	dd	0	; space for saving old isr
009	
010-037	;;;;; COPY LINES 009-036 FROM EXAMPLE 9.11 (timer) ;;;;;
038	
039	; parallel port interrupt service routine
040	parallel:	push ax
041	
042	mov al, 0x30	; set timer to one shot mode
043	out 0x43, al
044	
045	cmp word [cs:divider], 11000; current divisor is 11000
046	je	stopit	; yes, stop
047	
048	add word [cs:divider], 10; increase the divisor by 10
049	mov ax, [cs:divider]
050	out 0x40, al	; load divisor LSB in timer
051	mov al, ah
052	out 0x40, al	; load divisor MSB in timer
 

053
	mov	byte [cs:flag], 1	; flag next timer to switch on
054				
055		mov	al, 0x20	
056		out	0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
057		pop	ax	
058		iret		; return from interrupt
059				
060	stopit:	mov	byte [stop], 1	; flag to terminate the program
061		mov	al, 0x20	
062		out	0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
063		pop	ax	
064		iret		; return from interrupt
065				
066	start:	xor	ax, ax	
067		mov	es, ax	; point es to IVT base
068		mov	ax, [es:0x08*4]	
069		mov	[oldtimer], ax	; save offset of old routine
070		mov	ax, [es:0x08*4+2]	
071		mov	[oldtimer+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
072		cli		; disable interrupts
073		mov	word [es:0x08*4],	timer ; store offset at n*4
074		mov	[es:0x08*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
075		mov	word [es:0x0F*4],	parallel ; store offset at n*4
076		mov	[es:0x0F*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
077		sti		; enable interrupts
078				
079		mov	dx, 0x37A	
080		in	al, dx	; parallel port control register
081		or	al, 0x10	; turn interrupt enable bit on
082		out	dx, al	; write back register
083				
084		in	al, 0x21	; read interrupt mask register
085		and	al, 0x7F	; enable IRQ7 for parallel port
086		out	0x21, al	; write back register
087				
088	recheck:	cmp	byte [stop], 1	; is the termination flag set
089		jne	recheck	; no, check again
090				
091		mov	dx, 0x37A	
092		in	al, dx	; parallel port control register
093		and	al, 0xEF	; turn interrupt enable bit off
094		out	dx, al	; write back register
095				
096		in	al, 0x21	; read interrupt mask register
097		or	al, 0x80	; disable IRQ7 for parallel port
098		out	0x21, al	; write back regsiter
099				
100		cli		; disable interrupts
101		mov	ax, [oldtimer]	; read old timer ISR offset
102		mov	[es:0x08*4], ax	; restore old timer ISR offset
103		mov	ax, [oldtimer+2]	; read old timer ISR segment
104		mov	[es:0x08*4+2], ax	; restore old timer ISR segment
105		sti		; enable interrupts
106				
107		mov	ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
108		int	0x21	

This example is a mix of the previous two. Here we can increase the bulb intensity with F11 and decrease it with F12.

Example 9.13
001	; control external bulb intensity with F11 and F12
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	flag:	db	0	; next time turn on or turn off
006	divider:	dw	100	; initial timer divider
007	oldkb:	dd	0	; space for saving old ISR
008	
009-036	;;;;; COPY LINES 009-036 FROM EXAMPLE 9.11 (timer) ;;;;;
037	
038	; keyboard interrupt service routine
039	kbisr:	push ax
 

040	
041	in	al, 0x60
042	cmp al, 0x57
043	jne nextcmp
044	cmp word [cs:divider], 11000
045	je	exitkb
046	add word [cs:divider], 100
047	jmp exitkb
048	
049	nextcmp:	cmp al, 0x58
050	jne chain
051	cmp word [cs:divider], 100
052	je	exitkb
053	sub word [cs:divider], 100
054	jmp exitkb
055	
056	exitkb:	mov al, 0x20
057	out 0x20, al
058	
059	pop ax
060	iret
061	
062	chain:	pop ax
063	jmp far [cs:oldkb]
064	
065	; parallel port interrupt service routine
066	parallel:	push ax
067	
068	mov al, 0x30	; set timer to one shot mode
069	out 0x43, al
070	
071	mov ax, [cs:divider]
072	out 0x40, al	; load divisor LSB in timer
073	mov al, ah
074	out 0x40, al	; load divisor MSB in timer
075	mov byte [cs:flag], 1 ; flag next timer to switch on
076	
077	mov al, 0x20
078	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
079	pop ax
080	iret	; return from interrupt
081	
082	start:	xor ax, ax
083	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
084	mov ax, [es:0x09*4]
085	mov [oldkb], ax	; save offset of old routine
086	mov ax, [es:0x09*4+2]
087	mov [oldkb+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
088	cli	; disable interrupts
089	mov word [es:0x08*4], timer ; store offset at n*4
090	mov [es:0x08*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
091	mov word [es:0x09*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
092	mov [es:0x09*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
093	mov word [es:0x0F*4], parallel ; store offset at n*4
094	mov [es:0x0F*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
095	sti	; enable interrupts
096	
097	mov dx, 0x37A
098	in	al, dx	; parallel port control register
099	or	al, 0x10	; turn interrupt enable bit on
100	out dx, al	; write back register
101	
102	in	al, 0x21	; read interrupt mask register
103	and al, 0x7F	; enable IRQ7 for parallel port
104	out 0x21, al	; write back register
105	
106	mov dx, start	; end of resident portion
107	add dx, 15	; round up to next para
108	mov cl, 4
109	shr dx, cl	; number of paras
110	mov ax, 0x3100	; terminate and stay resident
111	int 0x21
 

EXERCISES
1.	Suggest a reason for the following. The statements are all true.
a.	We should disable interrupts while hooking interrupt 8h. I.e. while placing its segment and offset in the interrupt vector table.
b.	We need not do this for interrupt 80h.
c.	We need not do this when hooking interrupt 8h from inside the interrupt handler of interrupt 80h.
d.	We should disable interrupts while we are changing the stack (SS and SP).
e.	EOI is not sent from an interrupt handler which does interrupt chaining.
f.	If no EOI is sent from interrupt 9h and no chaining is done, interrupt 8h still comes if the interrupt flag is on.
g.	After getting the size in bytes by putting a label at the end of a COM TSR, 0fh is added before dividing by 10h.
h.	Interrupts are disabled but divide by zero interrupt still comes.
2.	If no hardware interrupts are coming, what are all possible reasons?
3.	Write a program to make an asterisks travel the border of the screen, from upper left to upper right to lower right to lower left and back to upper left indefinitely, making each movement after one second.
4.	[Musical Arrow] Write a TSR to make an arrow travel the border of the screen from top left to top right to bottom right to bottom left and back to top left at the speed of 36.4 locations per second. The arrow should not destroy the data beneath it and should be restored as soon as the arrow moves forward.
The arrow head should point in the direction of movement using the characters > V < and ^. The journey should be accompanied by a different tone from the pc speaker for each side of the screen. Do interrupt chaining so that running the TSR 10 times produces 10 arrows traveling at different locations.
HINT: At the start you will need to reprogram channel 0 for 36.4 interrupts per second, double the normal. You will have to reprogram channel 2 at every direction change, though you can enable the speaker once at the very start.
5.	In the above TSR hook the keyboard interrupt as well and check if 'q' is pressed. If not chain to the old interrupt, if yes restore everything and remove the TSR from memory. The effect should be that pressing 'q' removes one moving arrow. If you do interrupt chaining when pressing 'q' as well, it will remove all arrows at once.
6.	Write a TSR to rotate the screen (scroll up and copy the old top most line to the bottom) while F10 is pressed. The screen will keep rotating while F10 is pressed at 18.2 rows per second. As soon as F10 is released the rotation should stop and the original screen restored. A secondary buffer of only 160 bytes (one line of screen) can be used.
7.	Write a TSR that hooks software interrupt 0x80 and the timer interrupt. The software interrupt is called by other programs with the address of a far function in ES:DI and the number of timer ticks after which to call back that function in CX. The interrupt records this information and returns to the caller. The function will actually be called by the timer interrupt after the desired number of ticks. The maximum number of functions and their ticks can be fixed to 8.
8.	Write a TSR to clear the screen when CTRL key is pressed and restore it when it is released.
9.	Write a TSR to disable all writes to the hard disk when F10 is pressed and re- enable when pressed again like a toggle.
 

HINT: To write to the hard disk programs call the BIOS service INT 0x13 with AH=3.
10.	Write a keyboard interrupt handler that disables the timer interrupt (no timer interrupt should come) while Q is pressed. It should be re- enabled as soon as Q is released.
11.	Write a TSR to calculate the current typing speed of the user. Current typing speed is the number of characters typed by the user in the last five seconds. The speed should be represented by printing asterisks at the right border (80th column) of the screen starting from the upper right to the lower right corner (growing downwards). Draw n asterisks if the user typed n characters in the last five seconds. The count should be updated every second.
12.	Write a TSR to show a clock in the upper right corner of the screen in the format HH:MM:SS.DD where HH is hours in 24 hour format, MM is minutes, SS is seconds and DD is hundredth of second. The clock should beep twice for one second each time with half a second interval in between at the start of every minute at a frequency of your choice.

HINT: IBM PC uses a Real Time Clock (RTC) chip to keep track of time while switched off. It provides clock and calendar functions through its two I/O ports 70h and 71h. It is used as follows:
mov al, <command>
out 0x70, al	; command byte written at first port jmp D1	; waste one instruction time
D1:	in	al, 0x71	; result of command is in AL now
Following are few commands 00 Get current second 02 Get current minute 04 Get current hour
All numbers returned by RTC are in BCD. E.g. if it is 6:30 the second and third command will return 0x30 and 0x06 respectively in al.
 
10
Debug Interrupts 

10.1.	DEBUGGER USING SINGLE STEP INTERRUPT
The use of the trap flag has been deferred till now. The three flags not used for mathematical operations are the direction flag, the interrupt flag and the trap flag. The direction and interrupt flags have been previously discussed.
If the the trap flag is set, the after every instruction a type 1 interrupt will be automatically generated. When the IVT and reserved interrupts were discussed this was named as the single step interrupt. This is like the divide by zero interrupt which was never explicitly invoked but it came itself. The single step interrupt behaves in the same manner.
The debugger is made using this interrupt. It allows one instruction to be executed and then return control to us. It has its display code and its code to wait for the key in the INT 1 handler. Therefore after every instruction the values of all registers are shown and the debugger waits for a key. Another interrupt used by the debugger is the break point interrupt INT 3. Apart from single stepping debugger has the breakpoint feature. INT 3 is used for this feature. INT 3 has a single byte opcode so it can replace any instruction. To put a breakpoint the instruction is replaced with INT 3 opcode and restored in the INT 3 handler. The INT 3 opcode is placed again by a single step interrupt that is set up for this purpose after the replaced instruction has been executed.
There is no instruction to set or clear the trap flag like there are instructions for the interrupt and direction flags. We use two special instructions PUSHF and POPF to push and pop the flag from the stack. We use PUSHF to place flags on the stack, change TF in this image on the stack and then reload into the flags register with POPF.  The single step interrupt will come after the first instruction after POPF.  The interrupt mechanism automatically clears IF and TF otherwise there would an infinite recursion of the single step interrupt. The TF is set in the flags on the stack so another interrupt will comes after one more instruction is executed after the return of the interrupt.
The following example is a very elementary debugger using the trap flag and the single step interrupt.

Example 10.1
001	; single stepping using the trap flag and single step interrupt
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	flag:	db	0	; flag whether a key pressed
006	oldisr:	dd	0	; space for saving old ISR
007	names:	db	'FL =CS =IP =BP =AX =BX =CX =DX =SI =DI =DS =ES ='
008	
009-026	;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;;
027	
028	; subroutine to print a number on screen
029	; takes the row no, column no, and number to be printed as parameters
030	printnum:	push bp
031	mov bp, sp
032	push es
033	push ax
034	push bx
035	push cx
 

036	push dx
037	push di
038	
039	mov di, 80	; load di with columns per row
040	mov ax, [bp+8]	; load ax with row number
041	mul di	; multiply with columns per row
042	mov di, ax	; save result in di
043	add di, [bp+6]	; add column number
044	shl di, 1	; turn into byte count
045	add di, 8	; to end of number location
046	
047	mov ax, 0xb800
048	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
049	mov ax, [bp+4]	; load number in ax
050	mov bx, 16	; use base 16 for division
051	mov cx, 4	; initialize count of digits
052	
053	nextdigit:	mov dx, 0	; zero upper half of dividend
054	div bx	; divide by 10
055	add dl, 0x30	; convert digit into ascii value
056	cmp dl, 0x39	; is the digit an alphabet
057	jbe skipalpha	; no, skip addition
058	add dl, 7	; yes, make in alphabet code
059	skipalpha:	mov dh, 0x07	; attach normal attribute
060	mov [es:di], dx	; print char on screen
061	sub di, 2	; to previous screen location
062	loop nextdigit	; if no divide it again
063	
064	pop di
065	pop dx
066	pop cx
067	pop bx
068	pop ax
069	pop es
070	pop bp
071	ret 6
072	
073	; subroutine to print a string
074	; takes row no, column no, address of string, and its length
075	; as parameters
076	printstr:	push bp
077	mov bp, sp
078	push es
079	push ax
080	push bx
081	push cx
082	push dx
083	push si
084	push di
085	
086	mov ax, 0xb800
087	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
088	
089	mov di, 80	; load di with columns per row
090	mov ax, [bp+10]	; load ax with row number
091	mul di	; multiply with columns per row
092	mov di, ax	; save result in di
093	add di, [bp+8]	; add column number
094	shl di, 1	; turn into byte count
095	
096	mov si, [bp+6]	; string to be printed
097	mov cx, [bp+4]	; length of string
098	mov ah, 0x07	; normal attribute is fixed
099	
100	nextchar:	mov al, [si]	; load next char of string
101	mov [es:di], ax	; show next char on screen
102	add di, 2	; move to next screen location
103	add si, 1	; move to next char
104	loop nextchar	; repeat the operation cx times
105	
106	pop di
107	pop si
108	pop dx
109	pop cx
110	pop bx
111	pop ax
 

112	pop es
113	pop bp
114	ret 8
115	
116	; keyboard interrupt service routine
117	kbisr:	push ax
118	
119	in	al, 0x60	; read a char from keyboard port
120	test al, 0x80	; is it a press code
121	jnz skipflag	; no, leave the interrupt
123	add byte [cs:flag], al ; yes, set flag to proceed
124	
125	skipflag:	mov al, 0x20
126	out 0x20, al
127	pop ax
128	iret
129	
130	; single step interrupt service routine
131	trapisr:	push bp
132	mov bp, sp	; to read cs, ip and flags
133	push ax
134	push bx
135	push cx
136	push dx
137	push si
138	push di
139	push ds
140	push es
141	
142	sti	; waiting for keyboard interrupt
143	push cs
144	pop ds	; initialize ds to data segment
145	
146	mov byte [flag], 0	; set flag to wait for key
147	call clrscr	; clear the screen
148	
149	mov si, 6	; first register is at bp+6
150	mov cx, 12	; total 12 registers to print
151	mov ax, 0	; start from row 0
152	mov bx, 5	; print at column 5
153	
154	l3:	push ax	; row number
155	push bx	; column number
156	mov dx, [bp+si]
157	push dx	; number to be printed
158	call printnum	; print the number
159	sub si, 2	; point to next register
160	inc ax	; next row number
161	loop l3	; repeat for the 12 registers
162	
163	mov ax, 0	; start from row 0
164	mov bx, 0	; start from column 0
165	mov cx, 12	; total 12 register names
166	mov si, 4	; each name length is 4 chars
167	mov dx, names	; offset of first name in dx
168	
169	l1:	push ax	; row number
170	push bx	; column number
171	push dx	; offset of string
172	push si	; length of string
173	call printstr	; print the string
174	add dx, 4	; point to start of next string
175	inc ax	; new row number
176	loop l1	; repeat for 12 register names
177	
178	keywait:	cmp byte [flag], 0	; has a key been pressed
179	je	keywait	; no, check again
180	
181	pop es
182	pop ds
183	pop di
184	pop si
185	pop dx
186	pop cx
187	pop bx
188	pop ax
 

189	pop bp

190	iret
191	
192	start:	xor ax, ax
193	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
194	mov ax, [es:9*4]
195	mov [oldisr], ax	; save offset of old routine
196	mov ax, [es:9*4+2]
197	mov [oldisr+2], ax	; save segment of old routine
198	mov word [es:1*4], trapisr ; store offset at n*4
199	mov [es:1*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
200	cli	; disable interrupts
201	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
202	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
203	sti	; enable interrupts
204	
205	pushf	; save flags on stack
206	pop ax	; copy flags in ax
207	or	ax, 0x100	; set bit corresponding to TF
208	push ax	; save ax on stack
209	popf	; reload into flags register
210	
211	; the trap flag bit is on now, INT 1 will come after next instruction
212	; sample code to check the working of our elementary debugger
213	mov ax, 0
214	mov bx, 0x10
215	mov cx, 0x20
216	mov dx, 0x40
217	
218	l2:	inc ax
219	add bx, 2
220	dec cx
221	sub dx, 2
222	jmp l2


10.2.	DEBUGGER USING BREAKPOINT INTERRUPT 
We now write a debugger using INT 3. This debugger stops at the same point every time where the breakpoint has been set up unlike  the previous one which stopped at every instruction. The single step interrupt in this example is used only to restore the breakpoint interrupt which was removed by the breakpoint interrupt handler temporarily so that the original instruction can be executed.

Example 10.2
001	; elementary debugger using breakpoint interrupt
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	flag:	db	0	; flag whether a key pressed
006	oldisr:	dd	0	; space for saving old ISR
007	names:	db	'FL =CS =IP =BP =AX =BX =CX =DX =SI =DI =DS =ES ='
008	opcode:	db 0
009	opcodepos:	dw 0
010	
011-028	;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;;
029-072	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;;
073-114	;;;;; COPY LINES 073-114 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printstr) ;;;;;
115-127	;;;;; COPY LINES 116-128 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (kbisr) ;;;;;
128	
129	; single step interrupt service routine
130	trapisr:	push bp
131	mov bp, sp
132	push ax
133	push di
134	push ds
135	push es
136	
137	push cs
138	pop ds	; initialize ds to data segment
 

139	
140	mov ax, [bp+4]
141	mov es, ax	; load interrupted segment in es
142	mov di, [opcodepos]	; load saved opcode position
143	mov byte [es:di], 0xCC ; reset the opcode to INT3
144	and word [bp+6], 0xFEFF; clear TF in flags on stack
145	
146	pop es
147	pop ds
148	pop di
149	pop ax
150	pop bp
151	iret
152	
153	; breakpoint interrupt service routine
154	debugisr:	push bp
155	mov bp, sp	; to read cs, ip and flags
156	push ax
157	push bx
158	push cx
159	push dx
160	push si
161	push di
162	push ds
163	push es
164	
165	sti	; waiting for keyboard interrupt
166	push cs
167	pop ds	; initialize ds to data segment
168	
169	mov ax, [bp+4]
170	mov es, ax	; load interrupted segment in es
171	dec word [bp+2]	; decrement the return address
172	mov di, [bp+2]	; read the return address in di
173	mov word [opcodepos], di ; remember the return position
174	mov al, [opcode]	; load the original opcode
175	mov [es:di], al	; restore original opcode there
176	
177	mov byte [flag], 0	; set flag to wait for key
178	call clrscr	; clear the screen
179	
180	mov si, 6	; first register is at bp+6
181	mov cx, 12	; total 12 registers to print
182	mov ax, 0	; start from row 0
183	mov bx, 5	; print at column 5
184	
185	l3:	push ax	; row number
186	push bx	; column number
187	mov dx, [bp+si]
188	push dx	; number to be printed
189	call printnum	; print the number
190	sub si, 2	; point to next register
191	inc ax	; next row number
192	loop l3	; repeat for the 12 registers
193	
194	mov ax, 0	; start from row 0
195	mov bx, 0	; start from column 0
196	mov cx, 12	; total 12 register names
197	mov si, 4	; each name length is 4 chars
198	mov dx, names	; offset of first name in dx
199	
200	l1:	push ax	; row number
201	push bx	; column number
202	push dx	; offset of string
203	push si	; length of string
204	call printstr	; print the string
205	add dx, 4	; point to start of next string
206	inc ax	; new row number
207	loop l1	; repeat for 12 register names
208	
209	or word [bp+6], 0x0100 ; set TF in flags image on stack
210	
211	keywait:	cmp byte [flag], 0	; has a key been pressed
212	je	keywait	; no, check again
213	
214	pop es
 

215	pop ds
216	pop di
217	pop si
218	pop dx
219	pop cx
220	pop bx
221	pop ax
222	pop bp
223	iret
224	
225	start:	xor ax, ax
226	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
227	mov word [es:1*4], trapisr ; store offset at n*4
228	mov [es:1*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
229	mov word [es:3*4], debugisr ; store offset at n*4
230	mov [es:3*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
231	cli	; disable interrupts
232	mov word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4
233	mov [es:9*4+2], cs	; store segment at n*4+2
234	sti	; enable interrupts
235	
236	mov si, l2	; load breakpoint position in si
237	mov al, [cs:si]	; read opcode at that position
238	mov [opcode], al	; save opcode for later use
239	mov byte [cs:si], 0xCC ; change opcode to INT3
240	
241	; breakpoint is set now, INT3 will come at l2 on every iteration
242	; sample code to check the working of our elementary debugger
243	mov ax, 0
244	mov bx, 0x10
245	mov cx, 0x20
246	mov dx, 0x40
247	
248	l2:	inc ax
249	add bx, 2
250	dec cx
251	sub dx, 2
252	jmp l2
 
11
Multitasking 

11.1.	CONCEPTS OF MULTITASKING
To experience the power of assembly language we introduce how to implement multitasking. We observed in the debugger that our thread of instructions was broken by the debugger; it got the control, used all  registers, displayed an elaborate interface, waited for the key, and then  restored processor state to what was immediately before interruption. Our  program resumed as if nothing happened. The program execution was in the  same logical flow.
  If we have two different programs A and B. Program A is broken, its state  saved, and returned to B instead of A. By looking at the instruction set, we  can immediately say that nothing can stop us from doing that. IRET will return to whatever CS and IP it finds on the stack.  Now B is interrupted somehow, its state saved, and we return back to A. A will have no way of knowing that it was interrupted as its entire environment has been restored. It never knew the debugger took control when it was debugged. It sill has no way of gaining this knowledge. If this work of breaking and restoring programs is done at high speed the user will feel that all the programs are running at the same time where actually they are being switched to and forth at high speed.
In essence multitasking is simple, even though we have to be extremely careful when implementing it. The environment of a program in the very simple case is all its registers and stack. We will deal with stack later. Now to get control from the program without the program knowing about it, we can use the IRQ 0 highest priority interrupt  that is periodically coming to the processor.
 Now we present a very basic example of multitasking. We have two  subroutines written in assembly language. All the techniques discussed here  are applicable to code written in higher level languages as well. However the  code to control this multitasking cannot be easily written in a higher level  language so we write it in assembly language. The two subroutines rotate  bars by changing characters at the two corners of the screen and have infinite loops. By hooking the timer interrupt and saving and restoring the
 

Example 11.1
001	; elementary multitasking of two threads
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	;	ax,bx,ip,cs,flags storage area
006	taskstates:	dw	0, 0, 0, 0, 0	; task0 regs
007	dw	0, 0, 0, 0, 0	; task1 regs
008	dw	0, 0, 0, 0, 0	; task2 regs
009	
010	current:	db	0	; index of current task
011	chars:	db	'\|/-'	; shapes to form a bar
012	
013	; one task to be multitasked
014	taskone:	mov al, [chars+bx]	; read the next shape
015	mov [es:0], al	; write at top left of screen
 

016	inc bx	; increment to next shape
017	and bx, 3	; taking modulus by 4
018	jmp taskone	; infinite task
019	
020	; second task to be multitasked
021	tasktwo:	mov al, [chars+bx]	; read the next shape
022	mov [es:158], al	; write at top right of screen
023	inc bx	; increment to next shape
024	and bx, 3	; taking modulus by 4
025	jmp tasktwo	; infinite task
026	
027	; timer interrupt service routine
028	timer:	push ax
029	push bx
030	
031	mov bl, [cs:current]	; read index of current task
032	mov ax, 10	; space used by one task
033	mul bl	; multiply to get start of task
034	mov bx, ax	; load start of task in bx
035	
036	pop ax	; read original value of bx
037	mov [cs:taskstates+bx+2], ax ; space for current task
038	pop ax	; read original value of ax
039	mov [cs:taskstates+bx+0], ax ; space for current task
040	pop ax	; read original value of ip
041	mov [cs:taskstates+bx+4], ax ; space for current task
042	pop ax	; read original value of cs
043	mov [cs:taskstates+bx+6], ax ; space for current task
044	pop ax	; read original value of flags
045	mov [cs:taskstates+bx+8], ax ; space for current task
046	
047	inc byte [cs:current] ; update current task index
048	cmp byte [cs:current], 3 ; is task index out of range
049	jne skipreset	; no, proceed
050	mov byte [cs:current], 0 ; yes, reset to task 0
051	
052	skipreset:	mov bl, [cs:current]	; read index of current task
053	mov ax, 10	; space used by one task
054	mul bl	; multiply to get start of task
055	mov bx, ax	; load start of task in bx
056	
057	mov al, 0x20
058	out 0x20, al	; send EOI to PIC
059	
060	push word [cs:taskstates+bx+8] ; flags of new task
061	push word [cs:taskstates+bx+6] ; cs of new task
062	push word [cs:taskstates+bx+4] ; ip of new task
063	mov ax, [cs:taskstates+bx+0] ; ax of new task
064	mov bx, [cs:taskstates+bx+2] ; bx of new task
065	iret	; return to new task
066	
067	start:	mov word [taskstates+10+4], taskone ; initialize ip
068	mov [taskstates+10+6], cs	; initialize cs
069	mov word [taskstates+10+8], 0x0200 ; initialize flags
070	mov word [taskstates+20+4], tasktwo ; initialize ip
071	mov [taskstates+20+6], cs	; initialize cs
072	mov word [taskstates+20+8], 0x0200 ; initialize flags
073	mov word [current], 0	; set current task index
074	
075	xor ax, ax
076	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
077	cli
078	mov word [es:8*4], timer
079	mov [es:8*4+2], cs	; hook timer interrupt
080	mov ax, 0xb800
081	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
082	xor bx, bx	; initialize bx for tasks
083	sti
084	
085	jmp $	; infinite loop

  The space where all registers of a task are stored is called the process  control block or PCB. Actual PCB contains a few more things that are not 
 

 
11.2.	ELABORATE MULTITASKING
  In our next example we will save all 14 registers and the stack as well. 28  bytes are needed by these registers in the PCB. We add some more space to  make the size 32, a power of 2 for easy calculations. One of these words is used to form a linked list of the PCBs so that strict ordering of active PCBs is not necessary. Also in this example we have given every thread its own stack. Now threads can have function calls, parameters and local variables etc. Another important change in this example is that the creation of threads is now dynamic. The thread registration code initializes the PCB, and adds it to the linked list so that the scheduler will give it a turn.

Example 11.2
001	; multitasking and dynamic thread registration
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; PCB layout:
006	; ax,bx,cx,dx,si,di,bp,sp,ip,cs,ds,ss,es,flags,next,dummy
007	; 0, 2, 4, 6, 8,10,12,14,16,18,20,22,24, 26 , 28 , 30
008	
009	pcb:	times 32*16 dw 0	; space for 32 PCBs
010	stack:	times 32*256 dw 0	; space for 32 512 byte stacks
011	nextpcb:	dw	1	; index of next free pcb
012	current:	dw	0	; index of current pcb
013	lineno:	dw	0	; line number for next thread
014-057	
058	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;;
059	
060	; mytask subroutine to be run as a thread
061	; takes line number as parameter
062	mytask:	push bp
063	mov bp, sp
064	sub sp, 2	; thread local variable
065	push ax
066	push bx
067	
068	mov ax, [bp+4]	; load line number parameter
069	mov bx, 70	; use column number 70
070	mov word [bp-2], 0	; initialize local variable
071	
072	printagain:	push ax	; line number
073	push bx	; column number
074	push word [bp-2]	; number to be printed
075	call printnum	; print the number
076	inc word [bp-2]	; increment the local variable
077	jmp printagain	; infinitely print
078	
079	pop bx
080	pop ax
081	mov sp, bp
082	pop bp
083	ret
084	
085	; subroutine to register a new thread
086	; takes the segment, offset, of the thread routine and a parameter
087	; for the target thread subroutine
088	initpcb:	push bp
089	mov bp, sp
090	push ax
091	push bx
092	push cx
093	push si
094	
095	mov bx, [nextpcb]	; read next available pcb index
096	cmp bx, 32	; are all PCBs used
097	je	exit	; yes, exit
098	
 

099	mov cl, 5
100	shl bx, cl	; multiply by 32 for pcb start
101	
102	mov ax, [bp+8]	; read segment parameter
103	mov [pcb+bx+18], ax	; save in pcb space for cs
104	mov ax, [bp+6]	; read offset parameter
105	mov [pcb+bx+16], ax	; save in pcb space for ip
106	
107	mov [pcb+bx+22], ds	; set stack to our segment
108	mov si, [nextpcb]	; read this pcb index
109	mov cl, 9
110	shl si, cl	; multiply by 512
111	add si, 256*2+stack	; end of stack for this thread
112	mov ax, [bp+4]	; read parameter for subroutine
113	sub si, 2	; decrement thread stack pointer
114	mov [si], ax	; pushing param on thread stack
115	sub si, 2	; space for return address
116	mov [pcb+bx+14], si	; save si in pcb space for sp
117	
118	mov word [pcb+bx+26], 0x0200 ; initialize thread flags
119	mov ax, [pcb+28]	; read next of 0th thread in ax
120	mov [pcb+bx+28], ax	; set as next of new thread
121	mov ax, [nextpcb]	; read new thread index
123	mov [pcb+28], ax	; set as next of 0th thread
124	inc word [nextpcb]	; this pcb is now used
125	
126	exit:	pop si
127	pop cx
128	pop bx
129	pop ax
130	pop bp
131	ret 6
132	
133	; timer interrupt service routine
134	timer:	push ds
135	push bx
136	
137	push cs
138	pop ds	; initialize ds to data segment
139	
140	mov bx, [current]	; read index of current in bx
141	shl bx, 1
142	shl bx, 1
143	shl bx, 1
144	shl bx, 1
145	shl bx, 1	; multiply by 32 for pcb start
146	mov [pcb+bx+0], ax	; save ax in current pcb
147	mov [pcb+bx+4], cx	; save cx in current pcb
148	mov [pcb+bx+6], dx	; save dx in current pcb
149	mov [pcb+bx+8], si	; save si in current pcb
150	mov [pcb+bx+10], di	; save di in current pcb
151	mov [pcb+bx+12], bp	; save bp in current pcb
152	mov [pcb+bx+24], es	; save es in current pcb
153	
154	pop ax	; read original bx from stack
155	mov [pcb+bx+2], ax	; save bx in current pcb
156	pop ax	; read original ds from stack
157	mov [pcb+bx+20], ax	; save ds in current pcb
158	pop ax	; read original ip from stack
159	mov [pcb+bx+16], ax	; save ip in current pcb
160	pop ax	; read original cs from stack
161	mov [pcb+bx+18], ax	; save cs in current pcb
162	pop ax	; read original flags from stack
163	mov [pcb+bx+26], ax	; save cs in current pcb
164	mov [pcb+bx+22], ss	; save ss in current pcb
165	mov [pcb+bx+14], sp	; save sp in current pcb
166	
167	mov bx, [pcb+bx+28]	; read next pcb of this pcb
168	mov [current], bx	; update current to new pcb
169	mov cl, 5
170	shl bx, cl	; multiply by 32 for pcb start
171	
172	mov cx, [pcb+bx+4]	; read cx of new process
173	mov dx, [pcb+bx+6]	; read dx of new process
174	mov si, [pcb+bx+8]	; read si of new process
175	mov di, [pcb+bx+10]	; read diof new process
 

176		mov	bp, [pcb+bx+12]	;	read bp of new process
177		mov	es, [pcb+bx+24]	;	read es of new process
178		mov	ss, [pcb+bx+22]	;	read ss of new process
179		mov	sp, [pcb+bx+14]	;	read sp of new process
180				
181		push	word [pcb+bx+26]	;	push flags of new process
182		push	word [pcb+bx+18]	;	push cs of new process
183		push	word [pcb+bx+16]	;	push ip of new process
184		push	word [pcb+bx+20]	;	push ds of new process
185				
186		mov	al, 0x20	
187		out	0x20, al	;	send EOI to PIC
188				
189		mov	ax, [pcb+bx+0]	;	read ax of new process
190		mov	bx, [pcb+bx+2]	;	read bx of new process
191		pop	ds	;	read ds of new process
192		iret	;	return to new process
193				
194	start:	xor	ax, ax	
195		mov	es, ax	;	point es to IVT base
196				
197		cli		
198		mov	word [es:8*4], timer	
199		mov	[es:8*4+2], cs	;	hook timer interrupt
200		sti		
201				
202	nextkey:	xor	ah, ah	;	service 0 – get keystroke
203		int	0x16	;	bios keyboard services
204				
205		push	cs	;	use current code segment
206		mov	ax, mytask	
207		push	ax	;	use mytask as offset
208		push	word [lineno]	;	thread parameter
209		call	initpcb	;	register the thread
210				
211		inc	word [lineno]	;	update line number
212		jmp	nextkey	;	wait for next keypress
	

When the program is executed the threads display the numbers independently. However as keys are pressed and new threads are registered, there is an obvious slowdown in the speed of multitasking. To improve that, we can change the timer interrupt frequency. The following can be used to set to an approximately 1ms interval.
mov ax, 1100 out 0x40, al mov al, ah out 0x40, al
This makes the threads look faster. However the only real change is that the timer interrupt is now coming more frequently.

11.3.	MULTITASKING KERNEL AS TSR
The above examples had the multitasking code and the multitasked code in one program. Now we separate the multitasking kernel into a TSR so that
 

Example 11.3
001	; multitasking kernel as a TSR
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; PCB layout:
006	; ax,bx,cx,dx,si,di,bp,sp,ip,cs,ds,ss,es,flags,next,dummy
007	; 0, 2, 4, 6, 8,10,12,14,16,18,20,22,24, 26 , 28 , 30
008	
009	pcb:	times 32*16 dw 0	; space for 32 PCBs
 

010	stack:	times 32*256 dw 0	; space for 32 512 byte stacks
011	nextpcb:	dw	1	; index of next free pcb
012	current:	dw	0	; index of current pcb
013	
014-073	;;;;; COPY LINES 133-192 FROM EXAMPLE 11.2 (timer) ;;;;;
074	
075	; software interrupt to register a new thread
076	; takes parameter block in ds:si
077	; parameter block has cs, ip, ds, es, and param in this order
078	initpcb:	push ax
079	push bx
080	push cx
081	push di
082	
083	mov bx, [cs:nextpcb]	; read next available pcb index
084	cmp bx, 32	; are all PCBs used
085	je	exit	; yes, exit
086	
087	mov cl, 5
088	shl bx, cl	; multiply by 32 for pcb start
089	
090	mov ax, [si+0]	; read code segment parameter
091	mov [cs:pcb+bx+18], ax ; save in pcb space for cs
092	mov ax, [si+2]	; read offset parameter
093	mov [cs:pcb+bx+16], ax ; save in pcb space for ip
094	mov ax, [si+4]	; read data segment parameter
095	mov [cs:pcb+bx+20], ax ; save in pcb space for ds
096	mov ax, [si+6]	; read extra segment parameter
097	mov [cs:pcb+bx+24], ax ; save in pcb space for es
098	
099	mov [cs:pcb+bx+22], cs ; set stack to our segment
100	mov di, [cs:nextpcb]	; read this pcb index
101	mov cl, 9
102	shl di, cl	; multiply by 512
103	add di, 256*2+stack	; end of stack for this thread
104	mov ax, [si+8]	; read parameter for subroutine
105	sub di, 2	; decrement thread stack pointer
106	mov [cs:di], ax	; pushing param on thread stack
107	sub di, 4	; space for far return address
108	mov [cs:pcb+bx+14], di ; save di in pcb space for sp
109	
110	mov word [cs:pcb+bx+26], 0x0200 ; initialize flags
111	mov ax, [cs:pcb+28]	; read next of 0th thread in ax
112	mov [cs:pcb+bx+28], ax ; set as next of new thread
113	mov ax, [cs:nextpcb]	; read new thread index
114	mov [cs:pcb+28], ax	; set as next of 0th thread
115	inc word [cs:nextpcb] ; this pcb is now used
116	
117	exit:	pop di
118	pop cx
119	pop bx
120	pop ax
121	iret
123	
124	start:	xor ax, ax
125	mov es, ax	; point es to IVT base
126	
127	mov word [es:0x80*4], initpcb
128	mov [es:0x80*4+2], cs	; hook software int 80
129	cli
130	mov word [es:0x08*4], timer
131	mov [es:0x08*4+2], cs	; hook timer interrupt
132	sti
133	
134	mov dx, start
135	add dx, 15
136	mov cl, 4
137	shr dx, cl
138	
139	mov ax, 0x3100	; terminate and stay resident
140	int 0x21

The second part of our example is a simple program that has the threads to be registered with the multitasking kernel using its exported services.
 

Example 11.4
001	; multitasking TSR caller
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; parameter block layout:
006	; cs,ip,ds,es,param
007	; 0, 2, 4, 6, 8
008	
009	paramblock:	times 5 dw 0	; space for parameters
010	lineno:	dw	0	; line number for next thread
011	
012-055	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;;
056	
057	; subroutine to be run as a thread
058	; takes line number as parameter
059	mytask:	push bp
060	mov bp, sp
061	sub sp, 2	; thread local variable
062	push ax
063	push bx
064	
065	mov ax, [bp+4]	; load line number parameter
066	mov bx, 70	; use column number 70
067	mov word [bp-2], 0	; initialize local variable
068	
069	printagain:	push ax	; line number
070	push bx	; column number
071	push word [bp-2]	; number to be printed
072	call printnum	; print the number
073	inc word [bp-2]	; increment the local variable
074	jmp printagain	; infinitely print
075	
076	pop bx
077	pop ax
078	mov sp, bp
079	pop bp
080	retf
081	
082	start:	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – get keystroke
083	int 0x16	; bios keyboard services
084	
085	mov [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter
086	mov word [paramblock+2], mytask ; offset parameter
087	mov [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter
088	mov [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter
089	mov ax, [lineno]
090	mov [paramblock+8], ax ; parameter for thread
091	mov si, paramblock	; address of param block in si
092	int 0x80	; multitasking kernel interrupt
093	
094	inc word [lineno]	; update line number
095	jmp start	; wait for next key

We introduce yet another use of the multitasking kernel with this new example. In this example three different sort of routines are multitasked by the same kernel instead of repeatedly registering the same routine.

Example 11.5
001	; another multitasking TSR caller		
002	[org 0x0100]		
003	jmp start		
004			
005	; parameter block layout:		
006	; cs,ip,ds,es,param		
007	; 0, 2, 4, 6, 8		
008			
009	paramblock:	times 5 dw 0	;	space for parameters
010	lineno:	dw	0	;	line number for next thread
011	chars:	db '\|/-'	;	chracters for rotating bar
012	message:	db 'moving hello'	;	moving string
013	message2:	db '	'	;	to erase previous string
 

014	messagelen:	dw 12	; length of above strings
015	
016-059	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;;
060-101	;;;;; COPY LINES 073-114 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printstr) ;;;;;
102	
103	; subroutine to run as first thread
104	mytask:	push bp
105	mov bp, sp
106	sub sp, 2	; thread local variable
107	push ax
108	push bx
109	
110	xor ax, ax	; use line number 0
111	mov bx, 70	; use column number 70
112	mov word [bp-2], 0	; initialize local variable
113	
114	printagain:	push ax	; line number
115	push bx	; column number
116	push word [bp-2]	; number to be printed
117	call printnum	; print the number
118	inc word [bp-2]	; increment the local variable
119	jmp printagain	; infinitely print
120	
121	pop bx
123	pop ax
124	mov sp, bp
125	pop bp
126	retf
127	
128	; subroutine to run as second thread
129	mytask2:	push ax
130	push bx
131	push es
132	
133	mov ax, 0xb800
134	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
135	xor bx, bx	; initialize to use first shape
136	
137	rotateagain: mov al, [chars+bx]	; read current shape
138	mov [es:40], al	; print at specified place
139	inc bx	; update to next shape
140	and bx, 3	; take modulus with 4
141	jmp rotateagain	; repeat infinitely
142	
143	pop es
144	pop bx
145	pop ax
146	retf
147	
148	; subroutine to run as third thread
149	mytask3:	push bp
150	mov bp, sp
151	sub sp, 2	; thread local variable
152	push ax
153	push bx
154	push cx
155	
156	mov word [bp-2], 0	; initialize line number to 0
157	
158	nextline:	push word [bp-2]	; line number
159	mov bx, 50
160	push bx	; column number 50
161	mov ax, message
162	push ax	; offset of string
163	push word [messagelen] ; length of string
164	call printstr	; print the string
165	
166	mov cx, 0x100
167	waithere:	push cx	; save outer loop counter
168	mov cx, 0xffff
169	loop $	; repeat ffff times
170	pop cx	; restore outer loop counter
171	loop waithere	; repeat 0x100 times
172	
173	push word [bp-2]	; line number
174	mov bx, 50	; column number 50
 

175		push	bx	
176		mov	ax, message2	
177		push	ax	;	offset of blank string
178		push	word [messagelen] ;	length of string
179		call	printstr	;	print the string
180				
181		inc	word [bp-2]	;	update line number
182		cmp	word [bp-2], 25	;	is this the last line
183		jne	skipreset	;	no, proceed to draw
184		mov	word [bp-2], 0	;	yes, reset line number to 0
185				
186	skipreset:	jmp	nextline	;	proceed with next drawing
187				
188		pop	cx	
189		pop	bx	
190		pop	ax	
191		mov	sp, bp	
192		pop	bp	
193		retf		
194				
195	start:	mov	[paramblock+0], cs ;	code segment parameter
196		mov	word [paramblock+2],	mytask ; offset parameter
197		mov	[paramblock+4], ds ;	data segment parameter
198		mov	[paramblock+6], es ;	extra segment parameter
199		mov	word [paramblock+8],	0 ; parameter for thread
200		mov	si, paramblock	;	address of param block in si
201		int	0x80	;	multitasking kernel interrupt
202				
203		mov	[paramblock+0], cs ;	code segment parameter
204		mov	word [paramblock+2],	mytask2 ; offset parameter
205		mov	[paramblock+4], ds ;	data segment parameter
206		mov	[paramblock+6], es ;	extra segment parameter
207		mov	word [paramblock+8],	0 ; parameter for thread
208		mov	si, paramblock	;	address of param block in si
209		int	0x80	;	multitasking kernel interrupt
210				
211		mov	[paramblock+0], cs ;	code segment parameter
212		mov	word [paramblock+2],	mytask3 ; offset parameter
213		mov	[paramblock+4], ds ;	data segment parameter
214		mov	[paramblock+6], es ;	extra segment parameter
215		mov	word [paramblock+8],	0 ; parameter for thread
216		mov	si, paramblock	;	address of param block in si
217		int	0x80	;	multitasking kernel interrupt
218				
219		jmp $		


EXERCISES
1.	Change the multitasking kernel such that a new two byte variable is introduced in the PCB. This variable contains the number of turns this process should be given. For example if the first PCB contains 20 in this variable, the switch to second process should occur after 20 timer interrupts (approx one second at default speed) and similarly the switch from second to third process should occur after the number given in the second process’s PCB.
2.	Change the scheduler of the multitasking kernel to enque the current process index a ready queue, and dequeue the next process index from it, and assign it to current. Therefore the next field of the PCB is no longer used. Use queue functions from Exercise 5.XX.
3.	Add a function in the multitasking kernel to fork the current process through a software interrupt. Fork should allocate a new PCB and copy values of all registers of the caller’s PCB to the new PCB. It should allocate a stack and change SS, SP appropriately in the new PCB. It has to copy the caller’s stack on the newly allocated stack. It will set AX in the new PCB to 0 and in the old PB to 1 so that both threads can identify which is the creator and which is the created process and can act accordingly.
 

4.	Add a function in the multitasking kernel accessible via a software interrupt that allows the current process to terminate itself.
5.	Create a queue in the multitasking kernel called kbQ. This queue initially empty will contain characters typed by the user. Hook the keyboard interrupt for getting user keys. Convert the scan code to ASCII if the key is from a-z or 0-9 and enque it in kbQ. Ignore all other scan codes. Write a function checkkey accessible via a software interrupt that returns the process in AX a value removed from the queue. It waits if there is no key in the queue. Be aware of enabling interrupts if you wait here.
6.	Modify the multitasking kernel such that the initial process displays at the last line of the screen whatever is typed by the user and clears that line on enter. If the user types quit followed by enter restore everything to normal as it was before the multitasking kernel was there. If the user types start followed by enter, start one more rotating bar on the screen. The first rotating bar should appear in the upper left, the next in the second column, then third and so on. The bar color should be white. The user can type the commands ‘white’, ‘red’, and ‘green’ to change the color of new bars.
 
12
Video Services 



12.1.	BIOS VIDEO SERVICES

via INT 10. We will discuss some very simple services. Video services are classified into two broad categories; graphics mode services and text mode services. In graphics mode a location in video memory corresponds to a dot on the screen. In text mode this relation is not straightforward. The video  memory holds the ASCII of the character to be shown and the actual shape is read from a font definition stored elsewhere in memory. We first present a list of common video services used in text mode.

INT 10 - VIDEO - SET VIDEO MODE
AH = 00h
AL = desired video mode

Some common video modes include 40x25 text mode (mode 0), 80x25 text mode (mode 2), 80x50 text mode (mode 3), and 320x200 graphics mode (mode D).

INT 10 - VIDEO - SET TEXT-MODE CURSOR SHAPE
AH = 01h
CH = cursor start and options
CL = bottom scan line containing cursor (bits 0-4)
INT 10 - VIDEO - SET CURSOR POSITION
AH = 02h
BH = page number
0-3 in modes 2&3 0-7 in modes 0&1
0 in graphics modes DH = row (00h is top)
DL = column (00h is left)
INT 10 - VIDEO - SCROLL UP WINDOW
AH = 06h
AL = number of lines by which to scroll up (00h = clear entire window) BH = attribute used to write blank lines at bottom of window
CH, CL = row, column of window's upper left corner DH, DL = row, column of window's lower right corner INT 10 - VIDEO - SCROLL DOWN WINDOW
AH = 07h
AL = number of lines by which to scroll down (00h=clear entire window) BH = attribute used to write blank lines at top of window
CH, CL = row, column of window's upper left corner DH, DL = row, column of window's lower right corner
INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE CHARACTER AND ATTRIBUTE AT CURSOR POSITION
AH = 09h
AL = character to display BH = page number
 

BL = attribute (text mode) or color (graphics mode) CX = number of times to write character
INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE CHARACTER ONLY AT CURSOR POSITION
AH = 0Ah
AL = character to display BH = page number
BL = attribute (text mode) or color (graphics mode) CX = number of times to write character
INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE STRING
AH = 13h
AL = write mode
bit 0: update cursor after writing
bit 1: string contains alternating characters and attributes bits 2-7: reserved (0)
BH = page number
BL = attribute if string contains only characters CX = number of characters in string
DH, DL = row, column at which to start writing ES:BP -> string to write
Chargen Services
In our first example we will read the font definition in memory and change it to include a set of all on pixels in the last line showing an effect of underline on all character including space. An 8x16 font is stored in 16  bytes. A sample character and the corresponding 16 values stored in the font information are shown for the character ‘A’. We
start with two services from the chargen subset of video services that we are going to use.

INT 10 - VIDEO - GET FONT INFORMATION
AX = 1130h
BH = pointer specifier Return:
ES:BP = specified pointer
CX = bytes/character of on-screen font DL = highest character row on screen INT 10 - TEXT-MODE CHARGEN
AX = 1110h
ES:BP -> user table
CX = count of patterns to store
DX = character offset into map 2 block BL = block to load in map 2
BH = number of bytes per character pattern

We will use 6 as the pointer specifier which means the 8x16 font stored in ROM.

Example 12.1
001	; put underlines on screen font		
002	[org 0x0100]		
003	jmp start		
004			
005	font:	times 256*16 db 0	;	space for font
006			
007	start:	mov ax, 0x1130	;	service 11/30 – get font info
008	mov bx, 0x0600	;	ROM 8x16 font
009	int 0x10	;	bios video services
010			
011	mov si, bp	;	point si to rom font data
012	mov di, font	;	point di to space for font
 

013
	mov	cx, 256*16		;	font size
014		push	ds			
015		push	es			
016		pop	ds		;	ds:si to rom font data
017		pop	es		;	es:di to space for font
018		cld			;	auto increment mode
019		rep	movsb		;	copy font
020						
021		push	cs			
022		pop	ds		;	restore ds to data segment
023						
024		mov	si, font-1		;	point si before first char
025		mov	cx, 0x100		;	total 256 characters
026	change:	add	si, 16		;	one character has 16 bytes
027		mov	byte [si],	0xFF	;	change last line to all ones
028		loop	change		;	repeat for each character
029						
030		mov	bp, font		;	es:bp points to new font
031		mov	bx, 0x1000		;	bytes per char & block number
032		mov	cx, 0x100		;	number of characters to change
033		xor	dx, dx		;	first character to change
034		mov	ax, 0x1110		;	service 11/10 – load user font
035		int	0x10		;	bios video services
036						
037		mov	ax, 0x4c00		;	terminate program
038		int	0x21			

Our second example is similar to the last example however in this case we are doing something funny on the screen. We are reversing the shapes of all the characters on the screen.

Example 12.2
001	; reverse each character of screen font
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	font:	times 256*16 db 0	; space for font
006	
007	start:	mov ax, 0x1130	; service 11/30 – get font info
008	mov bx, 0x0600	; ROM 8x16 font
009	int 0x10	; bios video services
010	
011	mov si, bp	; point si to rom font data
012	mov di, font	; point di to space for font
013	mov cx, 256*16	; font size
014	push ds
015	push es
016	pop ds	; ds:si to rom font data
017	pop es	; es:di to space for font
018	cld	; auto increment mode
019	rep movsb	; copy font
020	
021	push cs
022	pop ds	; restore ds to data segment
023	
024	mov si, font	; point si to start of font
025	change:	mov al, [si]	; read one byte
026	mov cx, 8
027	inner:	shl al, 1	; shift left with MSB in carry
028	rcr bl, 1	; rotate right using carry
029	loop inner	; repeat eight times
030	mov [si], bl	; write back reversed byte
031	inc si	; next byte of font
032	cmp si, font+256*16	; is whole font reversed
033	jne change	; no, reverse next byte
034	
035	mov bp, font	; es:bp points to new font
036	mov bx, 0x1000	; bytes per char & block number
037	mov cx, 0x100	; number of characters to change
038	xor dx, dx	; first character to change
039	mov ax, 0x1110	; service 11/10 – load user font
040	int 0x10	; bios video services
041	
 

042	mov	ax,	0x4c00	; terminate program
043	int	0x21		


Graphics Mode Services
We will take an example of using graphics mode video services as well. We will draw a line across the screen using the following service.

INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE GRAPHICS PIXEL
AH = 0Ch
BH = page number AL = pixel color  CX = column 
DX = row 

Example 12.3
001	; draw line in graphics	mode		
002	[org 0x0100]			
003	mov ax,	0x000D	;	set 320x200 graphics mode
004	int 0x10		;	bios video services
005				
006	mov ax,	0x0C07	;	put pixel in white color
007	xor bx,	bx	;	page number 0
008	mov cx,	200	;	x position 200
009	mov dx,	200	;	y position 200
010				
011	l1:	int 0x10		;	bios video services
012	dec dx		;	decrease y position
013	loop l1		;	decrease x position and repeat
014				
015	mov ah,	0	;	service 0 – get keystroke
016	int 0x16		;	bios keyboard services
017				
018	mov ax,	0x0003	;	80x25 text mode
019	int 0x10		;	bios video services
020				
021	mov ax,	0x4c00	;	terminate program
022	int 0x21			


12.2.	DOS VIDEO SERVICES
 Services of DOS are more cooked and at a higher level than BIOS. They  provide less control but make routine tasks much easier. Some important  DOS services are listed below.

INT 21 - READ CHARACTER FROM STANDARD INPUT, WITH ECHO
AH = 01h
Return: AL = character read
INT 21 - WRITE STRING TO STANDARD OUTPUT
AH = 09h
DS:DX -> $ terminated string
INT 21 - BUFFERED INPUT
AH = 0Ah
DS:DX -> dos input buffer

The DOS input buffer has a special format where  the first byte stores the maximum characters buffer can hold, the second byte holds the number of characters actually read on return, and the following space is used for the actual characters read. We start will an example of reading a string with service 1 and displaying it with service 9.
 

Example 12.4
001	; character input using dos services		
002	[org 0x0100]		
003	jmp start		
004			
005	maxlength:	dw	80	;	maximum length of input
006	message:	db	10, 13, 'hello $'	;	greetings message
007	buffer:	times 81 db 0	;	space for input string
008			
009	start:	mov cx, [maxlength]	;	load maximum length in cx
010	mov si, buffer	;	point si to start of buffer
011			
012	nextchar:	mov ah, 1	;	service 1 – read character
013	int 0x21	;	dos services
014			
015	cmp al, 13	;	is enter pressed
016	je	exit	;	yes, leave input
017	mov [si], al	;	no, save this character
018	inc si	;	increment buffer pointer
019	loop nextchar	;	repeat for next input char
020			
021	exit:	mov byte [si], '$'	;	append $ to user input
022			
023	mov dx, message	;	greetings message
024	mov ah, 9	;	service 9 – write string
025	int 0x21	;	dos services
026			
027	mov dx, buffer	;	user input buffer
028	mov ah, 9	;	service 9 – write string
029	int 0x21	;	dos services
030			
031	mov ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
032	int 0x21		

Our next example uses the more cooked buffered input service of DOS and using the same service 9 to print the string.

Example 12.5
001	; buffer input using dos services
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	message:	db	10,13,'hello ', 10,		13, '$'
006	buffer:	db	80		length of buffer
007	db	0	; number of character on return
008	times 80 db 0	; actual buffer space
009	
010	start:	mov	dx, buffer		input buffer
011	mov ah, 0x0A	; service A – buffered input
012	int 0x21	; dos services
013	
014	mov bh, 0
015	mov bl, [buffer+1]	; read actual size in bx
016	mov byte [buffer+2+bx], '$' ; append $ to user input
017	
018	mov dx, message	; greetings message
019	mov ah, 9	; service 9 – write string
020	int 0x21	; dos services
021	
022	mov dx, buffer+2	; user input buffer
023	mov ah, 9	; service 9 – write string
024	int 0x21	; dos services
025	
026	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
027	int 0x21

More detail of DOS and BIOS interrupts is available in the Ralf Brown Interrupt List.
 

 
13
Secondary Storage 

13.1.	PHYSICAL FORMATION 
A floppy disk is a circular plate with a fine coating of magnetic material over it. The plate is enclosed in a plastic jacket  which has a cover that can slide to expose the magnetic surface. The drive motor attaches itself to the central piece and rotates the plate. Two heads on both sides can read the magnetically encoded data on the disk.
  If the head is fixed and the motor rotates the disk the readable area on the  disk surface forms a circle called a track. Head moved to the next step forms  another track and so on. In hard disks the same structure is extended to a larger number of tracks and plates. The tracks are further cut vertically into sectors. This is a logical division of the area on the tracks. Each sector holds 512 bytes of data. A standard floppy disk has 80 tracks and 18 sectors per track with two heads, one on each side totallying to 2880 sectors or 1440 KB of data. Hard disks have varying number of heads and tracks pertaining to their different capacities.


BIOS sees the disks as a combination of sectors, tracks, and heads, as a raw storage device without concern to whether it is reading a file or directory. BIOS provides the simplest and most powerful interface to the storage medium. However this raw storage is meaningless to the user who needs to store his files and organize them into directories. DOS builds a logical structure on this raw storage space to provide these abstractions. This logical formation is read and interpreted by DOS. If another file system is build on the same storage medium the interpretations change. Main units of  the DOS structure are the boot sector in head 0, track 0, and sector 1, the first FAT starting from head 0, track 0, sector 2, the second copy of FAT starting from head 0, track 0, sector 11, and the root directory starting from head 1, track 0, sector 2. The area from head 0, track 1, sector 16 to head 1, track 79, sector 18 is used for storing the data of the files. Among this we will be exploring the directory structure further. The 32 sectors reserved for the root directory contain 512 directory entries. The format of a 32 byte directory entry is shown below.
 

+00 Filename (8 bytes)
+08 Extension (3 bytes)
+0B Flag Byte (1 byte)
+0C Reserved (1 byte)
+0D Creation Date/Time (5 bytes)
+12 Last Accessed Data (2 bytes)
+14 Starting Cluster High Word (2 bytes) for FAT32
+16 Time (2 bytes)
+18 Date (2 bytes)
+1A Starting Cluster Low Word (2 bytes)
+1C File Size (4 bytes)

13.2.	STORAGE ACCESS USING BIOS
We will be using BIOS disk services to directly see the data stored in the directory entries by DOS. For this purpose we will be using the BIOS disk services.

INT 13 - DISK - RESET DISK SYSTEM
AH = 00h
DL = drive Return:
CF = error flag AH = error code
INT 13 - DISK - READ SECTOR(S) INTO MEMORY
AH = 02h
AL = number of sectors to read (must be nonzero) CH = low eight bits of cylinder number
CL = sector number 1-63 (bits 0-5)
high two bits of cylinder (bits 6-7, hard disk only) DH = head number
DL = drive number (bit 7 set for hard disk) ES:BX -> data buffer
Return:
CF = error flag AH = error code
AL = number of sectors transferred INT 13 - DISK - WRITE DISK SECTOR(S) AH = 03h
AL = number of sectors to write (must be nonzero) CH = low eight bits of cylinder number
CL = sector number 1-63 (bits 0-5)
high two bits of cylinder (bits 6-7, hard disk only) DH = head number
DL = drive number (bit 7 set for hard disk) ES:BX -> data buffer
Return:
CF = error flag AH = error code
AL = number of sectors transferred INT 13 - DISK - GET DRIVE PARAMETERS AH = 08h
DL = drive (bit 7 set for hard disk) Return:
CF = error flag AH = error code
CH = low eight bits of maximum cylinder number CL = maximum sector number (bits 5-0)
 

high two bits of maximum cylinder number (bits 7-6) DH = maximum head number
DL = number of drives
ES:DI -> drive parameter table (floppies only)


Example 13.1
001	; floppy directory using bios services
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	sector:	times 512 db 0	; space for directory sector
006	entryname:	times 11 db 0	; space for a file name
007	db	10, 13, '$'	; new line and terminating $
008	
009	start:	mov ah, 0	; service 0 – reset disk system
010	mov dl, 0	; drive A:
011	int 0x13	; bios disk services
012	jc	error	; if error, terminate program
013	
014	mov ah, 2	; service 2 – read sectors
015	mov al, 1	; count of sectors
016	mov ch, 0	; cyliner
017	mov cl, 2	; sector
018	mov dh, 1	; head
019	mov dl, 0	; drive A:
020	mov bx, sector	; buffer to read sector
021	int 0x13	; bios disk services
022	jc	error	; if error, terminate program
023	
024	mov bx, 0	; start from first entry
025	nextentry:	mov di, entryname	; point di to space for filename
026	mov si, sector	; point si to sector
027	add si, bx	; move ahead to desired entry
028	mov cx, 11	; one filename is 11 bytes long
029	cld	; auto increment mode
030	rep movsb	; copy filename
031	
032	mov ah, 9	; service 9 – output string
033	mov dx, entryname	; filename to be printed
034	int 0x21	; dos services
035	
036	add bx, 32	; point to next dir entry
037	cmp bx, 512	; is last entry in this sector
038	jne nextentry	; no, print next entry
039	
040	error:	mov ax, 0x4c00	; terminate program
041	int 0x21

With the given services and the bits allocated for heads, tracks, and sectors only 8GB disks can be accessed. This limitation can be overcome by using INT 13 extensions that take a linear 64bit sector number and handle all the head, track, sector conversion themselves. The important services in this category are listed below.

INT 13 - INT 13 Extensions - EXTENDED READ
AH = 42h
DL = drive number
DS:SI -> disk address packet Return:
CF = error flag AH = error code
disk address packet's block count field set to number of blocks successfully transferred
INT 13 - INT 13 Extensions - EXTENDED WRITE
AH = 43h
AL = write flags
 

DL = drive number
DS:SI -> disk address packet Return:
CF = error flag AH = error code
disk address packet's block count field set to number of blocks successfully transferred

The format of the disk address packet used above is as follows.

Offset	Size	Description
00h	BYTE	size of packet = 10h
01h	BYTE	reserved (0)
02h	WORD	number of blocks to transfer
04h	DWORD	-> transfer buffer
08h	QWORD	starting absolute block number

Hard disks have a different formation from floppy disks in that there is a partition table at the start that allows several logical disks to be maintained within a single physical disk. The physical sector 0 holds the master boot record and a partition table towards the end. The first 446 bytes contain MBR, then there are 4 16 byte partition entries and then there is a 2 byte signature. A partition table entry has the following format.

Byte 0 – 0x80 for active 0x00 for inactive Byte 1-3 – Starting CHS
Byte 4 – Partition Type Byte 5-7 – Ending CHS Byte 8-B – Starting LBA
Byte C-F – Size of Partition

Some important partition types are listed below.

00 Unused Entry
01 FAT12
05 Extended Partition
06 FAT16
0b FAT32
0c FAT32 LBA
0e FAT16 LBA
0f Extended LBA 07 NTFS

  Extended partition type signals that the specified area is treated as a  complete hard disk with its own partition table and partitions. Therefore  extended partitions allow a recursion in partitioning and consequently an  infinite number of partitions are possible. The following program reads the  partition tables (primary and extended) using recursion and displays in an indented form all partitions present on the first hard disk in the system.

Example 13.2
001	; a program to display the partition table
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	dap:	db	0x10, 0	; disk address packet
006	dw	1
007	dd	0, 0, 0
 

008	
009-026	msg:	times 17 db ' '
027	db	10, 13, '$'
028	fat12:	db	'FAT12...$'
029	fat16:	db	'FAT16...$'
030	fat32:	db	'FAT32...$'
031	ntfs:	db	'NTFS.	$'
032	extended:	db	'EXTEND..$'
033	unknown:	db	'UNKNOWN.$'
034	
035	partypes:	dw	0x1, fat12	; table of known partition types
036	dw	0x5, extended
037	dw	0x6, fat16
038	dw	0xe, fat16
039	dw	0xb, fat32
040	dw	0xc, fat32
041	dw	0x7, ntfs
042	dw	0xf, extended
043	dw	0x0, unknown
044	
045	; subroutine to print a number in a string as hex
046	; takes address of string and a 16bit number as parameter
047	printnum:	push bp
048	mov bp, sp
049	push ax
050	push bx
051	push cx
052	push dx
053	push di
054	
055	mov di, [bp+6]	; string to store the number
056	add di, 3
057	
058	mov ax, [bp+4]	; load number in ax
059	mov bx, 16	; use base 16 for division
060	mov cx, 4
061	
062	nextdigit:	mov dx, 0
063	div bx	; divide by 16
064	add dl, 0x30	; convert into ascii value
065	cmp dl, 0x39
066	jbe skipalpha
067	
068	add dl, 7
069	
070	skipalpha:	mov [di], dl	; update char in string
071	dec di
072	loop nextdigit
073	
074	pop di
075	pop dx
076	pop cx
077	pop bx
078	pop ax
079	pop bp
080	ret 4
081	
082	; subroutine to print the start and end of a partition
083	; takes the segment and offset of the partition table entry
084	printpart:	push bp
085	mov bp, sp
086	push es
087	push ax
088	push di
089	
090	les di, [bp+4]	; point es:di to dap
091	
092	mov ax, msg
093	push ax
094	push word [es:di+0xA]
095	call printnum	; print first half of start
096	
097	add ax, 4
098	push ax
099	push word [es:di+0x8]
100	call printnum	; print second half of start
 

101	
102	add ax, 5
103	push ax
104	push word [es:di+0xE]
105	call printnum	; print first half of end
106	
107	add ax, 4
108	push ax
109	push word [es:di+0xC]
110	call printnum	; print second half of end
111	
112	mov dx, msg
113	mov ah, 9
114	int 0x21	; print the whole on the screen
115	
116	pop di
117	pop ax
118	pop es
119	pop bp
120	ret 4
121	
123	; recursive subroutine to read the partition table
124	; take indentation level and 32bit absolute block number as parameters
125	readpart:	push bp
126	mov bp, sp
127	sub sp, 512	; local space to read sector
128	push ax
129	push bx
130	push cx
131	push dx
132	push si
133	
134	mov ax, bp
135	sub ax, 512
136	mov word [dap+4], ax	; init dest offset in dap
137	mov [dap+6], ds	; init dest segment in dap
138	mov ax, [bp+4]
139	mov [dap+0x8], ax	; init sector no in dap
140	mov ax, [bp+6]
141	mov [dap+0xA], ax	; init second half of sector no
142	
143	mov ah, 0x42	; read sector in LBA mode
144	mov dl, 0x80	; first hard disk
145	mov si, dap	; address of dap
146	int 0x13	; int 13
147	
148	jc	failed	; if failed, leave
149	
150	mov si, -66	; start of partition info
151	nextpart:	mov ax, [bp+4]	; read relative sector number
152	add [bp+si+0x8], ax	; make it absolute
153	mov ax, [bp+6]	; read second half
154	adc [bp+si+0xA], ax	; make seconf half absolute
155	
156	cmp byte [bp+si+4], 0	; is partition unused
157	je	exit
158	
159	mov bx, partypes	; point to partition types
160	mov di, 0
161	nextmatch:	mov ax, [bx+di]
162	cmp [bp+si+4], al	; is this partition known
163	je	found	; yes, so print its name
164	add di, 4	; no, try next entry in table
165	cmp di, 32	; are all entries compared
166	jne nextmatch	; no, try another
167	
168	found:	mov cx, [bp+8]	; load indentation level
169	jcxz noindent	; skip if no indentation needed
170	indent:	mov dl, ' '
171	mov ah, 2	; display char service
172	int 0x21	; dos services
173	loop indent	; print required no of spaces
174	
175	noindent:	add di, 2
176	mov dx, [bx+di]	; point to partition type name
177	mov ah, 9	; print string service
 

178		int	0x21	;	dos services
179					
180		push	ss		
181		mov	ax, bp		
182		add	ax, si		
183		push	ax	;	pass partition entry address
184		call	printpart	;	print start and end from it
185					
186		cmp	byte [bp+si+4], 5	;	is it an extended partition
187		je	recurse	;	yes, make a recursive call
188					
189		cmp	byte [bp+si+4], 0xf	;	is it an extended partition
190		jne	exit	;	yes, make a recursive call
191					
192	recurse:	mov	ax, [bp+8]		
193		add	ax, 2	;	increase indentation level
194		push	ax		
195		push	word [bp+si+0xA]	;	push partition type address
196		push	word [bp+si+0x8]		
197		call	readpart	;	recursive call
198					
199	exit:	add	si, 16	;	point to next partition entry
200		cmp	si, -2	;	gone past last entry
201		jne	nextpart	;	no, read this entry
202					
203	failed:	pop	si		
204		pop	dx		
205		pop	bx		
206		pop	cx		
207		pop	ax		
208		mov	sp, bp		
209		pop	bp		
210		ret	6		
211					
212	start:	xor	ax, ax		
213		push	ax	;	start from zero indentation
214		push	ax	;	main partition table at 0
215		push	ax		
216		call	readpart	;	read and print it
217					
218		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
219		int	0x21		


13.3.	STORAGE ACCESS USING DOS 
BIOS provides raw access to the storage medium while DOS gives a more logical view and more cooked services. Everything is a file. A directory is a  specially organized file that is interpreted by the operating system itself. A  list of important DOS services for file manipulation is given below.

INT 21 - CREATE OR TRUNCATE FILE
AH = 3Ch
CX = file attributes DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename Return:
CF = error flag
AX = file handle or error code INT 21 - OPEN EXISTING FILE  AH = 3Dh
AL = access and sharing modes DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename
CL = attribute mask of files to look for (server call only) Return:
CF = error flag
AX = file handle or error code
INT 21 - CLOSE FILE
AH = 3Eh
 

BX = file handle Return:
CF = error flag AX = error code
INT 21 - READ FROM FILE
AH = 3Fh
BX = file handle
CX = number of bytes to read DS:DX -> buffer for data Return:
CF = error flag
AX = number of bytes actually read or error code
INT 21 - WRITE TO FILE
AH = 40h
BX = file handle
CX = number of bytes to write DS:DX -> data to write Return:
CF = error flag
AX = number of bytes actually written or error code
INT 21 - DELETE FILE
AH = 41h
DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename (no wildcards, but see notes) Return:
CF = error flag AX = error code
INT 21 - SET CURRENT FILE POSITION
AH = 42h
AL = origin of move BX = file handle
CX:DX = offset from origin of new file position Return:
CF = error flag
DX:AX = new file position in bytes from start of file AX = error code in case of error
INT 21 - GET FILE ATTRIBUTES
AX = 4300h
DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename Return:
CF = error flag
CX = file attributes AX = error code
INT 21 - SET FILE ATTRIBUTES
AX = 4301h
CX = new file attributes DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename Return:
CF = error flag AX = error code

We will use some of these services to find that two files are same in contents or different. We will read the file names from the command prompt. The command string is passed to the program in the program segment prefix located at offset 0 in the current segment. The area from 0-7F contains information for DOS, while the command tail length is stored at 80. From 81 to FF, the actual command tail is stored terminated by a CR (Carriage Retrun).
 

Example 13.3
001	; file comparison using dos services
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	filename1:	times 128 db 0	; space for first filename
006	filename2:	times 128 db 0	; space for second filename
007	handle1:	dw	0	; handle for first file
008	handle2:	dw	0	; handle for second file
009	buffer1:	times 4096 db 0	; buffer for first file
010	buffer2:	times 4096 db 0	; buffer for second file
011	
012	format:	db	'Usage error: diff <filename1> <filename2>$'
013	openfailed:	db	'First file could not be opened$'
014	openfailed2: db	'Second file could not be opened$'
015	readfailed:	db	'First file could not be read$'
016	readfailed2: db	'Second file could not be read$'
017	different:	db	'Files are different$'
018	same:	db	'Files are same$'
019	
020	start:	mov ch, 0
021	mov cl, [0x80]	; command tail length in cx
022	dec cx	; leave the first space
023	mov di, 0x82	; start of command tail in di
024	mov al, 0x20	; space for parameter separation
025	cld	; auto increment mode
026	repne scasb	; search space
027	je	param2	; if found, proceed
028	mov dx, format	; else, select error message
029	jmp error	; proceed to error printing
030	
031	param2:	push cx	; save original cx
032	mov si, 0x82	; set si to start of param
033	mov cx, di	; set di to end of param
034	sub cx, 0x82	; find param size in cx
035	dec cx	; excluding the space
036	mov di, filename1	; set di to space for filename 1
037	rep movsb	; copy filename there
038	mov byte [di], 0	; terminate filename with 0
039	pop cx	; restore original cx
040	inc si	; go to start of next filename
041	mov di, filename2	; set di to space for filename 2
042	rep movsb	; copy filename there
043	mov byte [di], 0	; terminate filename with 0
044	
045	mov ah, 0x3d	; service 3d – open file
046	mov al, 0	; readonly mode
047	mov dx, filename1	; address of filename
048	int 0x21	; dos services
049	jnc open2	; if no error, proceed
050	mov dx, openfailed	; else, select error message
051	jmp error	; proceed to error printing
052	
053	open2:	mov [handle1], ax	; save handle for first file
054	mov ah, 0x3d	; service 3d – open file
055	mov al, 0	; readonly mode
056	mov dx, filename2	; address of filename
057	int 0x21	; dos services
058	jnc store2	; if no error, proceed
059	mov dx, openfailed2	; else, select error message
060	jmp error	; proceed to error printing
061	
062	store2:	mov [handle2], ax	; save handle for second file
063	
064	readloop:	mov ah, 0x3f	; service 3f – read file
065	mov bx, [handle1]	; handle for file to read
066	mov cx, 4096	; number of bytes to read
067	mov dx, buffer1	; buffer to read in
068	int 0x21	; dos services
069	jnc read2	; if no error, proceed
070	mov dx, readfailed	; else, select error message
071	jmp error	; proceed to error printing
072	
073	read2:	push ax	; save number of bytes read
074	mov ah, 0x3f	; service 3f – read file
 

075		mov	bx, [handle2]	;	handle for file to read
076		mov	cx, 4096	;	number of bytes to read
077		mov	dx, buffer2	;	buffer to read in
078		int	0x21	;	dos services
079		jnc	check	;	if no error, proceed
080		mov	dx, readfailed2	;	else, select error message
081		jmp	error	;	proceed to error printing
082					
083	check:	pop	cx	;	number of bytes read of file 1
084		cmp	ax, cx	;	are number of byte same
085		je	check2	;	yes, proceed to compare them
086		mov	dx, different	;	no, files are different
087		jmp	error	;	proceed to message printing
088					
089	check2:	test	ax, ax	;	are zero bytes read
090		jnz	compare	;	no, compare them
091		mov	dx, same	;	yes, files are same
092		jmp	error	;	proceed to message printing
093					
094	compare:	mov	si, buffer1	;	point si to file 1 buffer
095		mov	di, buffer2	;	point di to file 2 buffer
096		repe	cmpsb	;	compare the two buffers
097		je	check3	;	if equal, proceed
098		mov	dx, different	;	else, files are different
099		jmp	error	;	proceed to message printing
100					
101	check3:	cmp	ax, 4096	;	were 4096 bytes read
102		je	readloop	;	yes, try to read more
103		mov	dx, same	;	no, files are same
104					
105	error:	mov	ah, 9	;	service 9 – output message
106		int	0x21	;	dos services
107					
108		mov	ah, 0x3e	;	service 3e – close file
109		mov	bx, [handle1]	;	handle of file to close
110		int	0x21	;	dos services
111					
112		mov	ah, 0x3e	;	service 3e – close file
113		mov	bx, [handle2]	;	handle of file to close
114		int	0x21	;	dos services
115					
116		mov	ax, 0x4c00	;	terminate program
117		int	0x21		

  Another interesting service that DOS provides regarding files is executing  them. An important point to understand here is that whenever a program is  executed in DOS all available memory is allocated to it. No memory is available to execute any new programs. Therefore memory must be freed using explicit calls to DOS for this purpose before a program is executed. Important services in this regard are listed below.

INT 21 - ALLOCATE MEMORY
AH = 48h
BX = number of paragraphs to allocate Return:
CF = error flag
AX = segment of allocated block or error code in case of error BX = size of largest available block in case of error
INT 21 - FREE MEMORY
AH = 49h
ES = segment of block to free Return:
CF = error flag AX = error code
INT 21 - RESIZE MEMORY BLOCK 
AH = 4Ah
BX = new size in paragraphs
ES = segment of block to resize
 

Return:
CF = error flag AX = error code
BX = maximum paragraphs available for specified memory block
INT 21 - LOAD AND/OR EXECUTE PROGRAM
AH = 4Bh
AL = type of load (0 = load and execute)
DS:DX -> ASCIZ program name (must include extension) ES:BX -> parameter block
Return:
CF = error flag AX = error code

The format of parameter block is as follows.

Offset	Size	Description
00h	WORD	segment of environment to copy for child process
		(copy caller's environment if 0000h)
02h	DWORD	pointer to command tail to be copied into child's PSP
06h	DWORD	pointer to first FCB to be copied into child's PSP
0Ah	DWORD	pointer to second FCB to be copied into child's PSP
0Eh	DWORD	(AL=01h) will hold subprogram's initial SS:SP on return
12h	DWORD	(AL=01h) will hold entry point (CS:IP) on return

As an example we will use the multitasking kernel client from the multitasking chapter and modify it such that after running all three threads it executes a new instance of the command prompt instead of indefinitely hanging around.

Example 13.4
001	; another multitasking TSR caller
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	; parameter block layout:
006	; cs,ip,ds,es,param
007	; 0, 2, 4, 6, 8
008	
009	paramblock:	times 5 dw 0	; space for parameters
010	lineno:	dw	0	; line number for next thread
011	chars:	db '\|/-'	; chracters for rotating bar
012	message:	db 'moving hello'	; moving string
013	message2:	db '	'	; to erase previous string
014	messagelen:	dw 12	; length of above strings
015	tail:	db ' ',13
016	command:	db 'COMMAND.COM', 0
017	execblock:	times 11 dw 0
018	
019-062	;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;;
063-104	;;;;; COPY LINES 073-114 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printstr) ;;;;;
104-127	;;;;; COPY LINES 103-126 FROM EXAMPLE 11.5 (mytask) ;;;;;
128-146	;;;;; COPY LINES 128-146 FROM EXAMPLE 11.5 (mytask2) ;;;;;
147-192	;;;;; COPY LINES 148-193 FROM EXAMPLE 11.5 (mytask3) ;;;;;
193	
194	start:	mov [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter
195	mov word [paramblock+2], mytask ; offset parameter
196	mov [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter
197	mov [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter
198	mov word [paramblock+8], 0 ; parameter for thread
199	mov si, paramblock	; address of param block in si
200	int 0x80	; multitasking kernel interrupt
201	
202	mov [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter
203	mov word [paramblock+2], mytask2 ; offset parameter
204	mov [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter
 

205		mov	[paramblock+6], es ;	extra segment parameter
206		mov	word [paramblock+8],	0 ; parameter for thread
207		mov	si, paramblock	;	address of param block in si
208		int	0x80	;	multitasking kernel interrupt
209				
210		mov	[paramblock+0], cs ;	code segment parameter
211		mov	word [paramblock+2],	mytask3 ; offset parameter
212		mov	[paramblock+4], ds ;	data segment parameter
213		mov	[paramblock+6], es ;	extra segment parameter
214		mov	word [paramblock+8],	0 ; parameter for thread
215		mov	si, paramblock	;	address of param block in si
216		int	0x80	;	multitasking kernel interrupt
217				
218		mov	ah, 0x4a	;	service 4a – resize memory
219		mov	bx, end	;	end of memory retained
220		add	bx, 15	;	rounding up
221		mov	cl, 4	
222		shr	bx, cl	;	converting into paras
223		int	0x21	;	dos services
224				
225		mov	ah, 0x4b	;	service 4b - exec
226		mov	al, 0	;	load and execute
227		mov	dx, command	;	command to be executed
228		mov	bx, execblock	;	address of execblock
229		mov	word [bx+2], tail ;	offset of command tail
230		mov	[bx+4], ds	;	segment of command tail
231		int	0x21	;	dos services
232				
233		jmp	$	;	loop infinitely if returned
234	end:			


13.4.	DEVICE DRIVERS 
Device drivers are operating system extensions that become part of the operating system and extend its services to new devices. Device drivers in DOS are very simple. They just have their services exposed through the file system interface.
Device driver file starts with a header containing a link to the next driver in the first four bytes followed by a device attribute word. The most important bit in the device attribute word is bit 15 which dictates if it is a character device or a block device. If the bit is zero the device is a character device and otherwise a block device. Next word in the header is the offset of a strategy routine, and then is the offset of the interrupt routine and then in one byte, the number of units supported is stored. This information is padded with seven zeroes.
Strategy routine is called whenever the device is needed and it is passed a request header. Request header stores the unit requested, the command code, space for return value and buffer pointers etc. Important command codes include 0 to initialize, 1 to check media, 2 to build a BIOS parameter block, 4 and 8 for read and write respectively. For every command the first 13 bytes of request header are same.

RH+0	BYTE	Length of request header
RH+1	BYTE	Unit requested
RH+2	BYTE	Command code
RH+3	BYTE	Driver’s return code
RH+5	9 BYTES Reserved

The request header details for different commands is listed below.

0 – Driver Initialization
Passed to driver
RH+18	DWORD	Pointer to character after equal sign on CONFIG.SYS line that loaded driver (read-only)
 

RH+22	BYTE	Drive number for first unit of this block driver (0=A...)
Return from driver
RH+13	BYTE	Number of units (block devices only)
RH+14	DWORD	Address of first free memory above driver (break address)
RH+18	DWORD	BPB pointer array (block devices only)
1 – Media Check
RH+13	BYTE	Media descriptor byte Return
RH+14	BYTE	Media change code
-1 if disk changed
0	if dont know whether disk changed
1	if disk not changed
RH+15	DWORD	pointer to previous volume label if device attrib bit 11=1 (open/close/removable media supported)
2 – Build BPB
RH+13	BYTE	Media descriptor byte RH+14	DWORD	buffer address (one sector) Return
RH+18	DWORD	pointer to new BPB
if bit 13 (ibm format) is set buffer is first sector of fat, otherwise scrach space
4 – Read / 8 – Write / 9 – Write with verify
RH+13	BYTE	Media descriptor byte RH+14	DWORD	transfer address RH+18	WORD	byte or sector count
RH+20	WORD	starting sector number (for block devices) Return
RH+18	WORD	actual byte or sectors transferred
RH+22	DWORD	pointer to volume label if error 0Fh is returned

The BIOS parameter block discussed above is a structure that provides parameters about the storage medium. It is stored in the first sector or the boot sector of the device. Its contents are listed below.

00-01	bytes per sector
02	sectors per allocation unit
03-04	Number of reserved sectors ( 0 based) 05	number of file allocation tables
06-07	max number of root directory entries 08-09	total number of sectors in medium
0A	media descriptor byte
0B-0C	number of sectors occupied by a single FAT 0D-0E	sectors per track (3.0 or later)
0F-10	number of heads (3.0 or later)
11-12	number of hidden sectors (3.0 or later)
13-14	high-order word of number of hidden sectors (4.0)
15-18	IF bytes 8-9 are zero, total number of sectors in medium 19-1E	Reserved should be zero

We will be building an example device driver that takes some RAM and expresses it as a secondary storage device to the operating system. Therefore a new drive is added and that can be browsed to, filed copied to and from just like ordinary drives expect that this drive is very fast as it is located in the RAM. This program cannot be directly executed since it is not a user program. This must be loaded by adding the line “device=filename.sys” in the “config.sys” file in the root directory.
 

Example 13.5
001	; ram disk dos block device driver
002	header:	dd	-1	; no next driver
003	dw	0x2000	; driver attributes: block device
004	dw	strategy	; offset of strategy routine
005	dw	interrupt	; offset of interrupt routine
006	db	1	; no of units supported
007	times 7 db 0	; reserved
008	
009	request:	dd	0	; space for request header
010	
011	ramdisk:	times 11 db 0	; initial part of boot sector
012	bpb:	dw	512	; bytes per sector
013	db	1	; sectors per cluster
014	dw	1	; reserved sectors
015	db	1	; fat copies
016	dw	48	; root dir entries
017	dw	105	; total sectors
018	db	0xf8	; media desc byte: fixed disk
019	dw	1	; sectors per fat
020	times 482 db 0	; remaining part of boot sector
021	db	0xfe, 0xff, 0xff	; special bytes at start of FAT
022	times 509 db 0	; remaining FAT entries unused
023	times 103*512 db 0	; 103 sectors for data
024	bpbptr:	dw	bpb	; array of bpb pointers
025	
026	dispatch:	dw	init	; command 0: init
027	dw	mediacheck	; command 1: media check
028	dw	getbpb	; command 2: get bpb
029	dw	unknown	; command 3: not handled
030	dw	input	; command 4: input
031	dw	unknown	; command 5: not handled
032	dw	unknown	; command 6: not handled
033	dw	unknown	; command 7: not handled
034	dw	output	; command 8: output
035	dw	output	; command 9: output with verify
036	
037	; device driver strategy routine
038	strategy:	mov [cs:request], bx	; save request header offset
039	mov [cs:request+2], es ; save request header segment
040	retf
041	
042	; device driver interrupt routine
043	interrupt: push ax
044	push bx
045	push cx
046	push dx
047	push si
048	push di
049	push ds
050	push es
051	
052	push cs
053	pop ds
054	
055	les di, [request]
056	mov word [es:di+3], 0x0100
057	mov bl, [es:di+2]
058	mov bh, 0
059	cmp bx, 9
060	ja	skip
061	shl bx, 1
062	
063	call [dispatch+bx]
064	
065	skip:	pop es
066	pop ds
067	pop di
068	pop si
069	pop dx
070	pop cx
071	pop bx
072	pop ax
073	retf
074	
 

075	mediacheck: mov byte [es:di+14], 1
076	ret
077	
078	getbpb:	mov word [es:di+18], bpb
079	mov [es:di+20], ds
080	ret
081	
082	input:	mov ax, 512
083	mul word [es:di+18]
084	mov cx, ax
085	
086	mov ax, 512
087	mul word [es:di+20]
088	mov si, ax
089	add si, ramdisk
090	
091	les di, [es:di+14]
092	cld
093	rep movsb
094	ret
095	
096	output:	mov ax, 512
097	mul word [es:di+18]
098	mov cx, ax
099	
100	lds si, [es:di+14]
101	mov ax, 512
102	mul word [es:di+20]
103	mov di, ax
104	add di, ramdisk
105	
106	push cs
107	pop es
108	cld
109	rep movsb
110	unknown:	ret
111	
112	init:	mov ah, 9
113	mov dx, message
114	int 0x21
115	
116	mov byte [es:di+13], 1
117	mov word [es:di+14], init
118	mov [es:di+16], ds
119	mov word [es:di+18], bpbptr
120	mov [es:di+20], ds
121	ret
122	
123	message:	db	13, 10, 'RAM Disk Driver loaded',13,10,'$'
 

 
14
Serial Port Programming 

14.1.	INTRODUCTION
Serial port is a way of communication among two devices just like the parallel port. The basic difference is that whole bytes are sent from one place to another in case of parallel port while the bits are sent one by one on the serial port in a specially formatted fashion. The serial port connection is a 9pin DB-9 connector with pins assigned as shown below.
1	– Carrier Detect
 
6	–		Data	Set Ready (DSR)
7	–  Request  to
Send (RTS) 8 – Clear to Send
(CTS)
9 – Ring Indicator
(RI)
 
(CD)
2	– Received Data
(RD)
3	–	Transmitted
Data (TD)
4	– Data Terminal Ready (DTR)
5	– Signal Ground
 
We have made a wire that connects signal ground of the two connectors, the TD of one to the RD of the other and the RD of one to the TD of the other. This three wire connection is sufficient for full duplex serial communication. The data on the serial port is sent in a standard format called RS232 communication. The data starts with a 1 bit called the start bit, then five to eight data bits, an optional parity bit, and one to two 0 bits called stop bits. The number of data bits, parity bits, and the number of stop bits have to be configured at both ends. Also the duration of a bit must be precisely known at both ends called the baud rate of the communication.
The BIOS INT 14 provides serial port services. We will use a mix of BIOS services and direct port access for our example. A major limitation in using BIOS is that it does not allows interrupt driven data transfer, i.e. we are interrupted whenever a byte is ready to be read or a byte can be transferred since the previous transmission has completed. To achieve this we have to resort to direct port access. Important BIOS services regarding the serial port are discussed below.

INT 14 - SERIAL - INITIALIZE PORT
AH = 00h
AL = port parameters
DX = port number (00h-03h) Return:
AH = line status AL = modem status

  Every bit of line status conveys different information. From most  significant to least significant, the meanings are timeout, transmitter shift  register empty, transmitter holding register empty, break detect, receiver ready, overrun, parity error, and framing error. Modem status is not used in  direct serial communication. The port parameters in AL consist of the baud 
 

rate, parity scheme, number of stop bits, and number of data bits. The description of various bits is as under.















INT 14 - SERIAL - WRITE CHARACTER TO PORT
AH = 01h
AL = character to write
DX = port number (00h-03h) Return:
AH bit 7 = error flag
AH bits 6-0 = port status
INT 14 - SERIAL - READ CHARACTER FROM PORT
AH = 02h
DX = port number (00h-03h) Return:
AH = line status
AL = received character if AH bit 7 clear
INT 14 - SERIAL - GET PORT STATUS
AH = 03h
DX = port number (00h-03h) Return:
AH = line status AL = modem status

Serial port is also accessible via I/O ports. COM1  is accessible via ports 3F8-3FF while COM2 is accessible via 2F8-2FF. The first register at 3F8 (or 2F8 for the other port) is the transmitter holding register if written to and the receiver buffer register if read from. Other registers of our interest include 3F9 whose bit 0 must be set to enable received data available interrupt and bit 1 must be set to enable transmitter holding register empty interrupt. Bit 0 of 3FA is set if an interrupt is pending and its bits 1-3 identify the cause of the interrupt. The three bit causes are as follows.

110	(16550, 82510) timeout interrupt pending
101	(82510) timer interrupt
100	(82510) transmit machine
011	receiver line status interrupt. priority=highest
010	received data available register interrupt. priority=second
001	transmitter holding register empty interrupt. priority=third
000	modem status interrupt. priority=fourth

 The register at 3FB is line control register while the one at 3FD is line  status register. The line status register has the same bits as returned in line  status by the get port status BIOS interrupt however the most significant bit
 
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming	Course Code: CS401
CS401@vu.edu.pk

 

is reserved in this case instead of signaling a timeout. The register at 3FC is the modem control register. Bit 3 of this register must be set to enable interrupt generation by the serial port.

14.2.	SERIAL COMMUNICATION
We give an example where two computers are connected using a serial
 

Example 14.1
001	; a program using serial port to transfer data back and forth
002	[org 0x0100]
003	jmp start
004	
005	screenpos:	dw	0	; where to display next character
006	
007	; subroutine to clear the screen
008	clrscr:	push es
009	push ax
010	push cx
011	push di
012	
013	mov ax, 0xb800
014	mov es, ax	; point es to video base
015	xor di, di	; point di to top left column
016	mov ax, 0x0720	; space char in normal attribute
017	mov cx, 2000	; number of screen locations
018	
019	cld	; auto increment mode
020	rep stosw	; clear the whole screen
021	
022	pop di
023	pop cx
024	pop ax
025	pop es
026	ret
027	
028	serial:	push ax
029	push bx
030	push dx
031	push es
032	
033	mov dx, 0x3FA	; interrupt identification register
034	in	al, dx	; read register
035	and al, 0x0F	; leave lowerniblle only
036	cmp al, 4	; is receiver data available
037	jne skipall	; no, leave interrupt handler
038	
039	mov dx, 0x3F8	; data register
040	in	al, dx	; read character
041	
042	mov dx, 0xB800
043	mov es, dx	; point es to video memory
044	mov bx, [cs:screenpos] ; get current screen position
045	mov [es:bx], al	; write character on screen
046	add word [cs:screenpos], 2 ; update screen position
047	cmp word [cs:screenpos], 4000 ; is the screen full
048	jne skipall	; no, leave interrupt handler
049	
050	call clrscr	; clear the screen
051	mov word [cs:screenpos], 0 ; reset screen position
052	
053	skipall:	mov al, 0x20
054	out 0x20, al	; end of interrupt
055	
056	pop es
057	pop dx
058	pop bx
059	pop ax
060	iret

Virtual University of Pakistan	165
 

061			
062	start:	call	clrscr	; clear the screen
063			
064		mov	ah, 0	; initialize port service
065		mov	al, 0xE3	; line settings = 9600, 8, N, 1
066		xor	dx, dx	; port = COM1
067		int	0x14	; BIOS serial port services
068			
069		xor	ax, ax
070		mov	es, ax	; point es to IVT base
071		mov	word [es:0x0C*4], serial
072		mov	[es:0x0C*4+2], cs ; hook serial port interrupt
073			
074		mov	dx, 0x3FC	; modem control register
075		in	al, dx	; read register
076		or	al, 8	; enable bit 3 (OUT2)
077		out	dx, al	; write back to register
078			
079		mov	dx, 0x3F9	; interrupt enable register
080		in	al, dx	; read register
081		or	al, 1	; receiver data interrupt enable
082		out	dx, al	; write back to register
083			
084		in	al, 0x21	; read interrupt mask register
085		and	al, 0xEF	; enable IRQ 4
086		out	0x21, al	; write back to register
087			
088	main:	mov	ah, 0	; read key service
089		int	0x16	; BIOS keybaord services
090		push	ax	; save key for later use
091			
092	retest:	mov	ah, 3	; get line status
093		xor	dx, dx	; port = COM1
094		int	0x14	; BIOS keyboard services
095		and	ah, 32	; trasmitter holding register empty
096		jz	retest	; no, test again
097			
098		pop	ax	; load saved key
099		mov	dx, 0x3F8	; data port
100		out	dx, al	; send on serial port
101			
102		jmp	main
 
15 
Protected Mode 
	Programming 

15.1.	INTRODUCTION
 Till now we have been discussing the 8088 architecture which was a 16bit  processor. Newer processors of the Intel series provide 32bit architecture. Till  now we were in real mode of a newer processor which is basically a compatibility mode making the newer processor just a faster version of the original 8088. Switching processor in the newer 32bit mode is a very easy task. Just turn on the least significant bit of a new register called CR0  (Control Register 0) and the processor switches into 32bit mode called  protected mode. However manipulations in the protected mode are very different from those in the read mode.
 All registers in 386 have been extended to 32bits. The new names are EAX,  EBX, ECX, EDX, ESI, EDI, ESP, EBP, EIP, and EFLAGS. The original names  refer to the lower 16bits of these registers. A 32bit address register can access upto 4GB of memory so memory access has increased a lot. 
As regards segment registers the scheme is not so simple. First of all we call them segment selectors instead of segment registers and they are still 16bits wide. We are also given two other segment selectors FS and GS for no specific purpose just like ES.
The working of segment registers as being multiplied by 10 and added into the offset for obtaining the physical address is totally changed. Now the selector is just an index into an array of segment descriptors where each descriptor describes the base, limit, and attributes of a segment. Role of selector is to select on descriptor from the table of descriptors and the role of descriptor is to define the actual base address. This decouples the selection and actual definition which is needed in certain protection mechanisms introduced into this processor. For example an operating system can define the possible descriptors for a program and the program is bound to select one of them and nothing else. This sentence also hints that the processor  has some sense of programs that can or cannot do certain things like change  this table of descriptors. This is called the privilege level of the program and varies for 0 (highest privilege) to 3 (lowest privilege). The format of a selector is shown below.


The table index (TI) is set to 0 to access the global table of descriptors  called the  GDT (Global Descriptor Table). It is set to 1 to access another table, the local descriptor table (LDT) that we will not be using. RPL is the requested privilege level that ranges from 0-3 and informs what privilege level
 

the program wants when using this descriptor. The 13bit index is the actual index into the GDT to select the appropriate descriptor. 13 bits mean that a maximum of 8192 descriptors are possible in the GDT.
The GDT itself is an array of descriptors where each descriptor is an 8byte entry. The base and limit of GDT is stored in a 48bit register called the  GDTR. This register is loaded with a special instruction LGDT and is given a  memory address from where the 48bits are fetched. The first entry of the GDT must always be zero. It is called the null descriptor.  After that any number of entries upto a maximum of 8191 can follow. The format of a code and data descriptor is shown below.


The 32bit base in both descriptors is scattered into different places because of compatibility reasons. The limit is stored in 20 bits but the G bit  defines that the limit is in terms of bytes of 4K pages therefore a maximum of 4GB size is possible. The P bit must be set to signal that this segment is present in memory. DPL is the descriptor privilege level again related to the protection levels in 386. D bit defines that this segment is to execute code is 16bit mode or 32bit mode. C is conforming bit that we will not be using. R signals that the segment is readable. A bit is automatically set whenever the segment is accessed. The combination of S (system) and X (executable) tell that the descriptors is a code or a data descriptor. B (big) bit tells that if this data segment is used as stack SP is used or ESP is used.
Our first example is a very rudimentary one that just goes into protected mode and prints an A on the screen by directly accessing 000B8000.

Example 15.1
001	[org 0x0100]			
002		jmp	start	
003				
004	gdt:	dd	0x00000000,	0x00000000	; null descriptor
005		dd	0x0000FFFF,	0x00CF9A00	; 32bit code
006		;	\--/\--/	\/||||\/
007		;	|	|	| ||||+--- Base (16..23)=0 fill later
008		;	|	|	| |||+--- X=1 C=0 R=1 A=0
009		;	|	|	| ||+--- P=1 DPL=00 S=1
010		;	|	|	| |+--- Limit (16..19) = F
011		;	|	|	| +--- G=1 D=1 r=0 AVL=0
 

012	;	|	|	+--- Base (24..31) = 0
013	;	|	+--- Limit (0..15) = FFFF
014	;	+--- Base (0..15)=0 fill later
015	dd	0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9200	; data
016	;	\--/\--/	\/||||\/
017	;	|	|	| ||||+--- Base (16..23) = 0
018	;	|	|	| |||+--- X=0 E=0 W=1 A=0
019	;	|	|	| ||+--- P=1 DPL=00 S=1
020	;	|	|	| |+--- Limit (16..19) = F
021	;	|	|	| +--- G=1 B=1 r=0 AVL=0
022	;	|	|	+--- Base (24..31) = 0
023	;	|	+--- Limit (0..15) = FFFF
024	;	+--- Base (0..15) = 0
025	
026	gdtreg:	dw	0x17	; 16bit limit
027	dd	0	; 32bit base (filled later)
028	
029	stack:	times 256 dd 0 ; for use in p-mode
030	stacktop:
031	
032	start:	mov ax, 0x2401
033	int 0x15	; enable A20
034	
035	xor eax, eax
036	mov ax, cs
037	shl eax, 4
038	mov [gdt+0x08+2], ax
039	shr eax, 16
040	mov [gdt+0x08+4], al	; fill base of code desc
041	
042	xor edx, edx
043	mov dx, cs
044	shl edx, 4
045	add edx, stacktop	; edx = stack top for p-
046	mode
047	
048	xor eax, eax
049	mov ax, cs
050	shl eax, 4
051	add eax, gdt
052	mov [gdtreg+2], eax	; fill phy base of gdt
053	lgdt [gdtreg]	; load gdtr
054	
055	mov eax, cr0
056	or	eax, 1
057	
058	cli	; MUST disable interrupts
059	mov cr0, eax	; P-MODE ON
060	jmp 0x08:pstart	; load cs
061	
062	;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;;
063	
064	[bits 32] ; ask assembler to generate 32bit code
065	pstart:	mov eax, 0x10
066	mov ds, ax
067	mov es, ax	; load other seg regs
068	mov fs, ax	; flat memory model
069	mov gs, ax
070	mov ss, ax
071	mov esp, edx
072	
073	mov byte [0x000b8000], 'A'	; direct poke at video
074	jmp $	; hang around
075	

Gate A20 is a workaround for a bug that is not detailed here. The BIOS call  will simply enable it to open the whole memory for us. Another important thing is that the far jump we used loaded 8 into CS but CS is now a selector so it means Index=1, TI=0, and RPL=0 and therefore the actual descriptor loaded is the one at index 1 in the GDT.
 

15.2.	32BIT PROGRAMMING
Our next example is to give a falvour of 32bit programming. We have written the printstr function for read and for protected mode. The availability of larger registers and flexible addressing rules allows writing a much comprehensive version of the code. Also offsets to parameters and default widths change.

Example 15.2
001	[org 0x0100]	
002		jmp start
003		
004	gdt:	dd	0x00000000, 0x00000000	; null descriptor
005		dd	0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9A00	; 32bit code
006		dd	0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9200	; data
007		
008	gdtreg:	dw	0x17	; 16bit limit
009		dd	0	; 32bit base
010		
011	rstring:	db	'In Real Mode...', 0
012	pstring:	db	'In Protected Mode...', 0
013		
014	stack:	times 256 dd 0	; 1K stack
015	stacktop:	
016		
017	printstr:	push bp	; real mode print string
018		mov bp, sp
019		push ax
020		push cx
021		push si
022		push di
023		push es
024		
025		mov di,[bp+4] ;load string address
026		mov cx,0xffff ;load maximum possible size in cx
027		xor al,al	;clear al reg
028		repne scasb	;repeat scan
029		mov ax,0xffff	;
030		sub ax,cx	;calculate length
031		dec ax	;off by one, as it includes zero
032		mov cx,ax	;move length to counter
033		
034		mov ax, 0xb800
035		mov es, ax	; point es to video base
036		mov ax,80	;its a word move, clears ah
037		mul byte [bp+8]	;its a byte mul to calc y offset
038		add ax,[bp+10]	;add x offset
039		shl ax,1	;mul by 2 to get word offset
040		mov di,ax	;load pointer
041		
042		mov si, [bp+4]	; string to be printed
043		mov ah, [bp+6]	; load attribute
044		
045		cld	; set auto increment mode
046	nextchar:	lodsb	;load next char and inc si by 1
047		stosw	;store ax and inc di by 2
048		loop nextchar
049		
050		pop es
051		pop di
052		pop si
053		pop cx
054		pop ax
055		pop bp
056		ret 8
057		
058	start:	push byte 0	; 386 can directly push
059	immediates	
060		push byte 10
061		push byte 7
062		push word rstring
063		call printstr
064		
 

065	mov ax, 0x2401
066	int 0x15	; enable a20
067	
068	xor eax, eax
069	mov ax, cs
070	shl eax, 4
071	mov [gdt+0x08+2], ax
072	shr eax, 16
073	mov [gdt+0x08+4], al	; set base of code desc
074	
075	xor edx, edx
076	mov dx, cs
077	shl edx, 4
078	add edx, stacktop	; stacktop to be used in p-mode
079	
080	xor ebx, ebx
081	mov bx, cs
082	shl ebx, 4
083	add ebx, pstring	; pstring to be used in p-mode
084	
085	xor eax, eax
086	mov ax, cs
087	shl eax, 4
088	add eax, gdt
089	mov [gdtreg+2], eax	; set base of gdt
090	lgdt [gdtreg]	; load gdtr
091	
092	mov eax, cr0
093	or	eax, 1
094	
095	cli	; disable interrupts
096	mov cr0, eax	; enable protected mode
097	jmp 0x08:pstart	; load cs
098	
099	;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;;
100	
101	[bits 32]
102	pprintstr:	push ebp	; p-mode print string routine
103	mov ebp, esp
104	push eax
105	push ecx
106	push esi
107	push edi
108	
109	mov edi, [ebp+8] ;load string address
110	mov ecx, 0xffffffff ;load maximum possible size in cx
111	xor al, al	;clear al reg
112	repne scasb	;repeat scan
113	mov eax, 0xffffffff	;
114	sub eax, ecx	;calculate length
115	dec eax	;off by one, as it includes zero
116	mov ecx, eax	;move length to counter
117	
118	mov eax, 80	;its a word move, clears ah
119	mul	byte [ebp+16]	;its a byte mul to calc y
120	offset
121	add eax, [ebp+20]	;add x offset
123	shl eax, 1	;mul by 2 to get word offset
124	add eax, 0xb8000
125	mov edi, eax	;load pointer
126	
127	mov esi, [ebp+8]	; string to be printed
128	mov ah, [ebp+12]	; load attribute
129	
130	cld	; set auto increment mode
131	pnextchar:	lodsb	;load next char and inc si by 1
132	stosw	;store ax and inc di by 2
133	loop pnextchar
134	
135	pop edi
136	pop esi
137	pop ecx
138	pop eax
139	pop ebp
140	ret 16	; 4 args now mean 16 bytes
141	
 

142	pstart:	mov	ax, 0x10	; load all seg regs to 0x10
143		mov	ds, ax	; flat memory model
144		mov	es, ax	
145		mov	fs, ax	
146		mov	gs, ax	
147		mov	ss, ax	
148		mov	esp, edx	; load saved esp on stack
149				
150		push	byte 0	
133		push	byte 11	
134		push	byte 7	
135		push	ebx	
136		call	pprintstr	; call p-mode print string
137	routine			
138				
139		mov	eax, 0x000b8000	
140		mov	ebx, '/-\|'	
141				
142	nextsymbol:	mov	[eax], bl	
143		mov	ecx, 0x00FFFFFF	
144		loop	$	
145		ror	ebx, 8	
146		jmp	nextsymbol	


15.3.	VESA LINEAR FRAME BUFFER 
As an example of accessing a really large area of memory for which protected mode is a necessity, we will be accessing the video memory in high resolution and high color graphics mode where the necessary video memory is alone above a megabyte. We will be using the VESA VBE 2.0 for a standard for these high resolution modes.
VESA is the Video Electronics Standards Association and VBE is the set of  Video BIOS Extensions  proposed by them. The VESA VBE 2.0 standard  includes a linear frame buffer mode that we will be using. This mode allows direct access to the whole video memory. Some important VESA services are listed below.

INT 10 – VESA – Get SuperVGA Infromation
AX = 4F00h
ES:DI -> buffer for SuperVGA information Return:
AL = 4Fh if function supported AH = status
INT 10 – VESA – Get SuperVGA Mode Information
AX = 4F01h
CX = SuperVGA video mode
ES:DI -> 256-byte buffer for mode information Return:
AL = 4Fh if function supported AH = status
ES:DI filled if no error
INT 10 – VESA – Set VESA Video Mode
AX = 4F02h
BX = new video mode Return:
AL = 4Fh if function supported AH = status

One of the VESA defined modes is 4117 which is a 1024x768 mode with 16bit color and a linear frame buffer. The 16 color bits for every pixel are organized in 5:6:5 format with 5 bits for red, 6 for green, and 5 for blue. This makes 32 shades of red and blue and 64 shades  of green and 64K total
 

possible colors. The 32bit linear frame buffer base address is available at  offset 28 in the mode information buffer. Our example will produces shades  of green on the screen and clear them and again print them in an infinite loop with delays in between.

Example 15.3
001	[org 0x0100]
002	jmp start
003	
004	modeblock:	times 256 db 0
005	
006	gdt:	dd	0x00000000, 0x00000000	; null descriptor
007	dd	0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9A00	; 32bit code
008	dd	0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9200	; data
009	
010	gdtreg:	dw	0x17	; 16bit limit
011	dd	0	; 32bit base
012	
013	stack:	times 256 dd 0	; 1K stack
014	stacktop:
015	
016	start:	mov ax, 0x4f01	; get vesa mode information
017	mov	cx, 0x4117	; 1024*768*64K linear frame
018	buffer
019	mov di, modeblock
020	int 0x10
021	mov esi, [modeblock+0x28]	; save frame buffer base
022	
023	mov ax, 0x4f02	; set vesa mode
024	mov bx, 0x4117
025	int 0x10
026	
027	mov ax, 0x2401
028	int 0x15	; enable a20
029	
030	xor eax, eax
031	mov ax, cs
032	shl eax, 4
033	mov [gdt+0x08+2], ax
034	shr eax, 16
035	mov [gdt+0x08+4], al	; set base of code desc
036	
037	xor edx, edx
038	mov dx, cs
039	shl edx, 4
040	add edx, stacktop	; stacktop to be used in p-mode
041	
042	xor eax, eax
043	mov ax, cs
044	shl eax, 4
045	add eax, gdt
046	mov [gdtreg+2], eax	; set base of gdt
047	lgdt [gdtreg]	; load gdtr
048	
049	mov eax, cr0
050	or	eax, 1
051	
052	cli	; disable interrupts
053	mov cr0, eax	; enable protected mode
054	jmp 0x08:pstart	; load cs
055	
056	;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;;
057	
058	[bits 32]
059	pstart:	mov ax, 0x10	; load all seg regs to 0x10
060	mov ds, ax	; flat memory model
061	mov es, ax
062	mov fs, ax
063	mov gs, ax
064	mov ss, ax
065	mov esp, edx	; load saved esp on stack
066	
067	l1:	xor eax, eax
 

068		mov	edi, esi	
069		mov	ecx, 1024*768*2/4	; divide by 4 as dwords
070		cld		
071		rep	stosd	
072				
073		mov	eax, 0x07FF07FF	
074		mov	ecx, 32	; no of bands
075		mov	edi, esi	
076				
077	l2:	push	ecx	
078		mov	ecx, 768*16	; band width = 32
079	lines			
080		cld		
081		rep	stosd	
082				
083		mov	ecx, 0x000FFFFF	; small wait
084		loop	$	
085		pop	ecx	
086				
087		sub	eax, 0x00410041	
088		loop	l2	
089				
090		mov	ecx, 0x0FFFFFFF	; long wait
091		loop	$	
092		jmp	l1	
093				


15.4.	INTERRUPT HANDLING
Handling interrupts in protected mode is also different. Instead of the IVT at physical address 0 there is the IDT (interrupt descriptor table) located at physical address stored in IDTR, a special purpose register. The IDTR is also a 48bit register similar in structure to the GDTR and loaded with another special instruction LGDT. The format of the interrupt descriptor is as shown below.

The P and DPL have the same meaning as in data and code descriptors. The S bit tells that this is a system descriptor while the 1110 following it tells that it is a 386 interrupt gate. Our example hooks the keyboard and timer interrupts and displays certain things on the screen to show that they are working.

Example 15.4
001	[org 0x0100]					
002		jmp	start			
003						
004	gdt:	dd	0x00000000,	0x00000000	;	null descriptor
005		dd	0x0000FFFF,	0x00CF9A00	;	32bit code
006		dd	0x0000FFFF,	0x00CF9200	;	data
007						
008	gdtreg:	dw	0x17		;	16bit limit
009		dd	0		;	32bit base
 

010	
011	idt:	times 8 dw unhandled, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000
012	dw	timer, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000
013	\---/ \----/	||\/ \	/
014	|	|	|| |	+----- offset bits 16..32
015	|	|	|| +	reserved
016	|	|	|+------ Type=E 386 Interrupt Gate
017	|	|	+--- P=1 DPL=00 S=0
018	|	+	selector
019	+-------- offset bits 0..15
020	dw	keyboard, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000
021	times 246 dw unhandled, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000
022	
023	idtreg:	dw	0x07FF
024	dd	0
025	
026	stack:	times 256 dd 0	; 1K stack
027	stacktop:
028	
029	start:	mov ax, 0x2401
030	int 0x15	; enable a20
031	
032	xor eax, eax
033	mov ax, cs
034	shl eax, 4
035	mov [gdt+0x08+2], ax
036	shr eax, 16
037	mov [gdt+0x08+4], al	; set base of code desc
038	
039	xor edx, edx
040	mov dx, cs
041	shl edx, 4
042	add edx, stacktop	; stacktop to be used in p-mode
043	
044	xor eax, eax
045	mov ax, cs
046	shl eax, 4
047	add eax, gdt
048	mov [gdtreg+2], eax	; set base of gdt
049	lgdt [gdtreg]	; load gdtr
050	
051	xor eax, eax
052	mov ax, cs
053	shl eax, 4
054	add eax, idt
055	mov [idtreg+2], eax	; set base of idt
056	
057	cli	; disable interrupts
058	lidt [idtreg]	; load idtr
059	
060	mov eax, cr0
061	or	eax, 1
062	mov cr0, eax	; enable protected mode
063	
064	jmp 0x08:pstart	; load cs
065	
066	;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;;
067	
068	[bits 32]
069	unhandled:	iret
070	
071	timer:	push eax
072	
073	inc byte [0x000b8000]
074	
075	mov al, 0x20
076	out 0x20, al
077	pop eax
078	iret
079	
080	keyboard:	push eax
081	
082	in	al, 0x60
083	mov ah, al
084	and al, 0x0F
085	shr ah, 4
 

086		add	ax, 0x3030		
087		cmp	al, 0x39		
088		jbe	skip1		
089		add	al, 7		
090	skip1:	cmp	ah, 0x39		
091		jbe	skip2		
092		add	ah, 7		
093	skip2:	mov	[0x000b809C],	ah	
094		mov	[0x000b809E],	al	
095					
096	skipkb:	mov	al, 0x20		
097		out	0x20, al		
098		pop	eax		
099		iret			
100					
101	pstart:	mov	ax, 0x10		; load all seg regs to 0x10
102		mov	ds, ax		; flat memory model
103		mov	es, ax		
104		mov	fs, ax		
105		mov	gs, ax		
106		mov	ss, ax		
107		mov	esp, edx		; load saved esp on stack
108					
109		mov	al, 0xFC		
110		out	0x21, al		; no unexpected int comes
111					
112		sti			; interrupts are okay now
113					
114		jmp	$		



EXERCISES
1.	Write very brief and to-the-point answers.
a.	Why loading idtr with a value appropriate for real mode is necessary while gdtr is not?
b.	What should we do in protected mode so that when we turn protection off, we are in unreal mode?
c.	If the line jmp code:next is replaced with call code:somefun, the prefetch queue is still emptied. What problem will occur when somefun will return?
d.	How much is ESP decremented when an interrupt arrives. This depends on weather we are in 16-bit mode or 32-bit. Does it depend on any other thing as well? If yes, what?
e.	Give two instructions that change the TR register.
2.	Name the following descriptors like code descriptor, data descriptor, interrupt gate etc.
gdt: dd 0x00000000, 0x00000000 dd 0x00000000, 0x00000000 dd 0x80000fA0, 0x0000820b
dd 0x0000ffff, 0x00409a00 dd 0x80000000, 0x0001d20b
3.	Using the above GDT, which of the following values, when moved into DS will cause an exception and why.
0x00
0x08
0x10
0x18
0x28
0x23
4.	Using the above GDT, if DS contains 0x20, which of the following offsets will cause an exception on read access?
0x0ffff 0x10000
0x10001
 

5.	The following function is written in 32-bit code for a 16-bit stack. Against every instruction, write the prefixes generated before that instruction. Prefixes can be address size, operand size, repeat, or segment override. Then rewrite the code such that no prefixes are generated considering that this is assembled and executed in 32-bit mode. Don’t care for retaining register values. The function copies specified number of DWORDs between two segments.

[bits 32]	
memcpy:	mov	bp, sp	
	lds	esi, [bp+4]	; source address
	les	edi, [bp+10]	; destination address
	mov	cx, [bp+16]	; count of DWORDs to move
	shl	cx, 1	; make into count of WORDs
L1:	mov	dx, [si]	
	mov	[es:di], dx	
	dec	cx	
	jnz	L1	
	ret		
6.	Rewrite the following scheduler so that it schedules processes stored in readyQ, where enque and deque functions are redefined and readyQ contains TSS selectors of processes to be multitasked. Remember you can’t use a register as a segment in a jump (eg jmp ax:0) but you can jump to an indirect address (eg jmp far [eax]) where eax points to a six-byte address. Declare any variables you need.

mov al, 0x20 scheduler:	jmp USERONESEL:0
out 0x20, al
mov byte [USERONEDESC+5], 0x89 jmp USERTWOSEL:0
out 0x20, al
mov byte [USERTWODESC+5], 0x89
jmp scheduler
7.	Protected mode has specialized mechanism for multitasking using task state segments but the method used in real mode i.e. saving all registers in a PCB, selecting the next PCB and loading all registers from there is still applicable. Multitask two tasks in protected mode multitasking without TSS. Assume that all processes are at level zero so no protection issues arise. Be careful to save the complete state of the process.
8.	Write the following descriptors.
a.	32 bit, conforming, execute-only code segment at level 2, with base at 6MB and a size of 4MB.
b.	16 bit, non-conforming, readable code segment at level 0, with base at 1MB and a size of 10 bytes.
c.	Read only data segment at level 3, with base at 0 and size of 1MB.
d.	Interrupt Gate with selector 180h and offset 11223344h.
9.	Write physical addresses for the following accesses where CS points to the first descriptor above, DS to the second, ES to the third, EBX contains 00010000h, and ESI contains 00020000h
a.	[bx+si]
b.	[ebx+esi-2ffffh]
c.	[es:ebx-10h]
10.	Which of the following will cause exceptions and why. The registers have the same values as the last question.
a.	mov eax, [cs:10000h]
b.	mov [es:esi:100h], ebx
c.	mov ax, [es:ebx]
11.	Give short answers.
a.	How can a GPF (General protection fault) occur while running the following code
push es pop es
 

b.	How can a GPF occur during the following instruction? Give any two reasons.
jmp 10h:100h
c.	What will happen if we call interrupt 80h after loading out IDT and before switching to protected mode?
d.	What will happen if we call interrupt 80h after switching into protected mode but before making a far jump?
12.	Write the following descriptors. Assume values for attributes not specifically mentioned.
a.	Write able 32-bit data segment with 1 GB base and 1 GB limit and a privilege level of 2.
b.	Readable 16-bit code descriptor with 1 MB base and 1 MB limit and a privilege level of 1.
c.	Interrupt gate given that the handler is at 48h:12345678h and a privilege level of 0.
13.	Describe the following descriptors. Give their type and the value of all their fields.
dd 01234567h, 789abcdeh dd 30405060h, 70809010h
dd 00aabb00h, 00ffee00h
14.	Make an EXE file, switch into protected mode, rotate an asterisk on the border of the screen, and return to real mode when the border is traversed.
 
16 
Interfacing with High  Level Languages 

16.1.	CALLING CONVENTIONS
To interface an assembly routine with a high level language program means to be able to call functions back and forth. And to be able to do so requires knowledge of certain behavior of the HLL when calling functions. This behavior of calling functions is called the calling conventions of the  language. Two prevalent calling conventions are the C calling convention and  the Pascal calling convention.

What is the naming convention
 C prepends an underscore to every function or variable name while Pascal  translates the name to all uppercase. C++ has a weird name mangling  scheme that is compiler dependent. To avoid it C++ can be forced to use C style naming with extern “C” directive.

How are parameters passed to the routine
In C parameters are pushed in reverse order with the rightmost being pushed first. While in Pascal they are pushed in proper order with the leftmost being pushed first.

Which registers must be preserved 
Both standards preserve EBX, ESI, EDI, EBP, ESP, DS, ES, and SS.

Which registers are used as scratch
Both standards do not preserve or guarantee the value of EAX, ECX, EDX, FS, GS, EFLAGS, and any other registers.

Which register holds the return value 
Both C and Pascal return upto 32bit large values in EAX and upto 64bit large values in EDX:EAX.

Who is responsible for removing the parameters
 In C the caller removes the parameter while in Pascal the callee removes  them. The C scheme has reasons pertaining to its provision for variable  number of arguments.

16.2.	CALLING C FROM ASSEMBLY
For example we take a function divide declared in C as follows.

int divide( int dividend, int divisor );

To call this function from assembly we have to write.

push dword [mydivisor] 
 

push dword [mydividend] call _divide
add esp, 8
; EAX holds the answer

Observe the order of parameters according to the C calling conventions and observe that the caller cleared the stack. Now take another example of a function written in C as follows.

void swap( int* p1, int* p2 )
{
int temp = *p1;
*p1 = *p2;
*p2 = temp;
}

To call it from assembly we have to write this.

[section .text] extern _swap
x:	dd 4
y:	dd 7

push dword y push dword x
call _swap	; will only retain the specified registers add esp, 8

Observe how pointers were initialized appropriately. The above function swap was converted into assembly by the gcc compiler as follows.

; swap generated by gcc with no optimizations (converted to Intel syntax)
; 15 instructions AND 13 memory accesses
_swap:
push ebp
mov	ebp, esp
sub	esp, 4	; space created for temp

mov eax, [ebp+8] mov eax, [eax]
mov	[ebp-4], eax	; temp = *p1

mov edx, [ebp+8] mov eax, [ebp+12] mov eax, [eax]
mov	[edx], eax	; *p1 = *p2

mov edx, [ebp+12] mov eax, [ebp-4]
mov [edx], eax	; *p2 = temp

leave	;;;;; EQUIVALENT TO mov esp, ebp AND pop ebp ;;;;; ret

If we turn on optimizations the same function is compiled into the following code.
 
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming	Course Code: CS401
CS401@vu.edu.pk

 



; generated with full optimization by gcc compiler
; 12 instructions AND 11 memory accesses
_swap:
push	ebp
mov	ebp, esp
push	ebx

mov	edx, [ebp+8]
mov	ecx, [ebp+12]
mov	ebx, [edx]
mov	eax, [ecx]
mov	[edx], eax
mov	[ecx], ebx

pop	ebx
pop	ebp ret
16.3.	CALLING ASSEMBLY FROM C
We now write a hand optimized version in assembly. Our version is only 6 instructions and 6 memory accesses.

Example 16.1
001
002
003
004
005
006
007
008	[section .text] global    _swap
_swap:   mov ecx,[esp+4]   ; copy parameter p1 to ecx mov edx,[esp+8]   ; copy parameter p2 to edx mov eax,[ecx] ; copy *p1 into eax
xchg eax,[edx] ; exchange eax with *p2 mov [ecx],eax ; copy eax into *p1
ret	; return from this function
We assemble the above program with the following command.
•	nasm –f win32 swap.asm
This produces a swap.obj file. The format directive told the assembler that it is to be linked with a 32bit Windows executable. The linking process involves resolving imported symbols of one object files with export symbols of another. In NASM an imported symbol is declared with the extern directive while and exported symbol is declared with the global directive.
We write the following program in C to call this assembly routine. We should have provided the swap.obj file to the C linker otherwise an unresolved external symbol error will come.

Example 16.1
001	#include <stdio.h>
002	
003	void swap( int* p1, int* p2 );
004	
005	int main()
006	{
007	int a = 10, b = 20;
008	printf( "a=%d b=%d\n", a, b );
009	swap(&a, &b );
010	printf( "a=%d b=%d\n", a, b );
011	system( "PAUSE" );
012	return 0;
013	}

Virtual University of Pakistan	181
 

EXERCISES
1.	Write a traverse function in assembly, which takes an array, the number of elements in the array and the address of another function to be called for each member of the array. Call the function from a C program.
2.	Make the linked list functions make in Exercise 5.XX available to C programs using the following declarations.
struct node {
int data;
struct node* next;
};
void init( void );
struct node* createlist( void );
void insertafter( struct node*, int ); void deleteafter( struct node* );
void deletelist( struct node* );
3.	Add two functions to the above program implemented in C. The function “printnode” should print the data in the passed node using printf, while “countfree” should count the number of free nodes by traversing the free list starting from the node address stored in firstfree.
void printnode( struct node* ); void countfree( void );
4.	Add the function “printlist” to the above program and implement in assembly. This function should traverse the list whose head is passed as parameter and for each node containing data (head is dummy and doesn’t contain data) calls the C function printnode to actually print the contained data.
void printlist( struct node* );
5.	Modify the createlist and deletelist functions in the above program to increment and decrement an integer variable “listcount” declared in C to maintain a count of linked lists present.
 
17



We emphasized that assembly language has to be learned once and every processor can be programmed by that person. To give a flavour of two different widely popular processors we introduce the Motorolla 68K series and the Sun SPARC processors. The Motorolla 68K processors are very popular in high performance embedded applications while the Sun SPARC processors are popular in very high end enterprise servers. We will compare them with the Intel x86 series which is known for its success in the desktop market.

17.1.	MOTOROLLA 68K PROCESSORS
Motorolla 68K processors are very similar to Intel x86 series in their architecture and instruction set. The both are of the same era and added various features at the same time. The instructions are very similar however the difference in architecture evident from a programmer’s point of view must be understood.
68K processors have 16 23bit general purpose registers named from A0-A7 and D0-D7. A0-A7 can hold addresses in indirect memory accesses. These can also be used as software stack pointers. Stack in 68K is not as rigit a structure as it is in x86. There is a 32bit program counter (PC) that holds the address of currently executing instruction. The 8bit condition code register (CCR) holds the X (Extend) N (Negative) Z (Zero) V (Overflow) C (Carry) flags. X is set to C for extended operations (addition, subtraction, or shifting).
Motrolla processors allow bit addressing, that is a specific bit in a byte or a bit field, i.e. a number of bits can be directly accessed. This is a very useful feature especially in control applications. Other data types include byte, word, long word, and quad word. A special MOVE16 instruction also accepts a 16byte block.
68K allows indirect memory access using any A register. A special memory access allows post increment or predecrement as part of memory access. These forms are written as (An), (An)+, and –(An). Other forms allow addressing with another regiser as index and with constant displacement. Using one of the A registers as the stack pointer and using the post increment and pre decrement forms of addressing, stack is implemented. Immediates can also be given as arguments and are preceded with a hash sign (#). Addressing is indicated with parenthesis instead of brackets.
68K has no segmentation; it however has a paged memory model. It used the big endian format in contrast to the little endian used by the Intel processors. It has varying instruction lengths from 1-11 words. It has a decrementing stack just like the Intel one. The format of instructions is “operation source, destination” which is different from the Intel order of operands. Some instructions from various instruction groups are given below.

Data Movement
EXG D0, D2
MOVE.B (A1), (A2)
 

MOVEA (2222).L, A4 MOVEQ #12, D7
Arithmetic
ADD D7, (A4)
CLR (A3)	(set to zero) CMP (A2), D1
ASL, ASR, LSL, LSR, ROR, ROL, ROXL, ROXR (shift operations)
Program Control
BRA label JMP (A3)
BSR label	(CALL)
JSR (A2)	(indirect call)
RTD #4	(RET N)
Conditional Branch
BCC	(branch if carry clear)
BLS	(branch if Lower or Same)
BLT	(branch if Less Than)
BEQ	(branch if Equal)
BVC	(branch if Overflow clear)

17.2.	SUN SPARC PROCESSOR
The Sun SPARC is a very popular processing belonging to the RISC (reduced instruction set computer) family of processors. RISC processors originally named because of the very few rudimentary instructions they provided, are now providing almost as many instruction as CISC (complex instruction set computer). However some properties like a fixed instruction size and single clock execution for most instructions are there.
SPARC stands for Scalable Processor ARChitecture. SPARC is a 64bit processor. It byte order is user settable and even on a per program basis. So one program may be using little endian byte order and another may be using big endian at the same time. Data types include byte, Halfword, Word (32bit), and Double Word (64bits) and Quadword. It has a fixed 32bit instruction size. It has a concept of ASI (Address Space Identifier); an 8bit number that works similar to a segment.
There are 8 global registers and 8 alternate global registers. One of them is active at a time and accessible as g0-g7. Apart from that it has 8 in registers (i0-i7), 8 local registers (l0-l7), and 8 out registers (o0-o7). All registers are 64bit in size. The global registers can also be called r0-r7, in registers as r8- r15, local registers as r16-r23, and out registers as r24-r31.
SPARC introduces a concept of register window. One window is 24 registers and the active window is pointed to by a special register called Current Window Pointer (CWP). The actual number of registers in the processor is in hundreds not restricted by the architecture definition. Two instruction SAVE and RESTORE move this register window forward and backward by 16 registers. Therefore one SAVE instruction makes the out register the in registers and brings in new local and out registers. A RESTORE instruction makes the in registers out registers and restores the old local and in registers. This way parameters passing and returning can be totally done in registers and there is no need to save and restore registers inside subroutines.
The register o6 is conventionally used as the stack pointer. Return address is stored in o7 by the CALL instruction. The register g0 (r0) is always 0 so loading 0 in a register is made easy. SPARC is a totally register based architecture, or it is called a load-store architecture where memory access is only allowed in data movement instruction. Rest of the operations must be done on registers.
 
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming	Course Code: CS401
CS401@vu.edu.pk

 

SPARC instructions have two sources and a distinct destination. This allows more flexibility in writing programs. Some examples of instructions of this processor follow.

Data Movement
LDSB [rn], rn	(load signed byte)
LDUW [rn], rn	(load unsigned word)
STH [rn], rn	(store half word)
Arithmetic
source1 = rn
source2 = rn or simm13 dest = rn
ADD r2, r3, r4 SUB r2, 4000, r5
SLL, SRA, SRL	(shifting)
AND, OR, XOR	(logical)
Program Control
CALL	(direct call)
JMPL	(register indirect)
RET SAVE RESTORE
BA label	(Branch Always)
BE label	(branch if equal)
BCC label	(branch if carry clear)
BLE label	(branch if less or equal)
BVS label	(branch if overflow set)
































Virtual University of Pakistan	185
